= Aliases
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book

:icons:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

. link:ProcessDefaults.adoc[Process Defaults]
. link:ClientSideBufferingControls.adoc[Client-side Buffering Controls]

[[DUGP1Dataphoria-Aliases]]
== Introduction

ll connections to a Dataphor Server begin with the process of selecting
an __alias__. Aliases provide a named connection configuration for a
Dataphor Server. They allow for the management of different connection
configurations on a given client machine, or for different users on the
machine. There are two types of aliases, __in-process__, and
__out-of-process__.

In-processIn-process aliases allow for the configuration of a complete
Dataphor Server instance to be hosted within the client process.
Typically, an in-process alias is used when connecting with Dataphoria
in development scenarios.

Out-of-processOut-of-process aliases allow for connection to an existing
Dataphor Server instance. The instance can be hosted in a Windows
Service, or an in-process instance in Dataphoria running on the same
machine, or another machine on the network.

Both types of aliases include session configuration information, which
supplies the credentials for the user and governs the behavior of the
session. Once the session has been established, changing these settings
has no effect. The System library provides operators for manipulating
the configuration settings of an open session where appropriate.

Each alias is specified as either a machine-specific alias, or a
user-specific alias. If a given user-specific alias has the same name as
a machine-specific alias, the user-specific alias will be used.

Dataphoria and the Frontend Clients provide the ability to select an
alias using the Connect To Server dialog:
image::../Images/DataphorServerLogin.bmp[Dataphoria Server Login]


This interface provides for the selection and management of server
aliases. It also functions as a login screen, allowing the default
credentials specified in the alias to be given. Clicking Add... or
Edit... displays the alias edit screen.

image::../Images/DataphorServerAliasEdit.bmp[Dataphoria Server Alias Edit]

[[DUGP1Dataphoria-Aliases-SessionInformation]]
== Session Information

The configuration information for a session is specified through a set
of properties available on both types of aliases. Clicking the
AdvancedÂ >> button on the alias edit screen provides access to these
properties.

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Property |Description
|DefaultIsolationLevel |Determines the default isolation level setting
for processes started on this session.

|DefaultLibraryName |Determines the default library for the session. If
specified, the current library for the session is initially set to this
value.

|DefaultMaxCallDepth |Determines the default maximum call depth for
processes on this session. The default value is 1024.

|DefaultMaxStackDepth |Determines the default maximum stack depth for
processes on this session. The default value is 32767.

|DefaultUseDTC |Determines the default UseDTC setting for processes
started on this session. Defaults to false.

|DefaultUseImplicitTransactions |Determines the default
UseImplicitTransactions setting for processes started on this session.
Defaults to true.

|FetchAtOpen |Determines whether or not the CLI will fetch as part of
the open call.

|FetchCount |Determines the number of rows which will be buffered by the
CLI. A FetchCount of 1 effectively disables row buffering.

|Password |Password used to login to the Dataphor Server. The default
login for the Dataphor Server is Admin with a blank password.

|UsePlanCache |Determines whether or not to use the server plan cache on
this session.

|UserID |User ID used to login to the Dataphor Server. The default login
for the Dataphor Server is Admin with a blank password.
|=======================================================================

[[DUGP1UserCredentials]]
=== User Credentials

The UserID and Password properties specify the security credentials used
to login to the Dataphor Server. These are defaults for the server
alias, and are overridden by the information provided by the connecting
user in the Dataphor Server Login screen. These values are only used to
connect if the alias is used explicitly by the client, bypassing the
login screen.

The default UserID and Password for a Dataphor Server instance is
`Admin`, `blank`. Alphora recommends changing this default, and
safeguarding the administrative password, as it allows a user complete
access to a Dataphor Server.

[[DUGP1DefaultLibraryName]]
=== Default Library Name

The DefaultLibraryName setting determines the initial current library
for the session. Once the session has been established, changing this
setting will have no effect. Setting the current library for a session
is accomplished using the SetLibrary operator. The current library name
for the current session can be retrieved using the LibraryName operator
with no parameters.

The current library is used to determine the _name resolution path_ for
the session, which is used in the name resolution process. The current
library is also the default container for newly created catalog objects.
For more information on libraries in D4, refer to the
<<../DevelopersGuide/WorkingWithLibraries.adoc#DDGWorkingWithLibraries, Working with Libraries>>
chapter in the Logical Application Design part of the Dataphor Developer's Guide.

The default value for this setting is blank, meaning that the Dataphor
Server will select a suitable default current library. Typically, the
Dataphor Server selects the General library for this purpose.

[[DUGP1Dataphoria-Aliases-Out-Of-ProcessAliases]]
== Out-Of-Process Aliases
Aliases

An out-of-process server alias indicates that the client will connect to
an existing Dataphor Server instance. The Dataphor Server may be located
in another process on the same machine, on another machine on the
network, or even on the internet.

image::../Images/DataphorServerAliasEdit.bmp[Dataphoria Server Alias Edit]

The server alias for an out-of-process connection only needs to specify
a host name, and a port number. The host name is the name of the machine
on which the Dataphor Server is running, and the port number is the
TCP/IP port on which the server is listening for connections. The port
number for a Dataphor Server instance can be configured on the
In-Process alias, or using the Service Configuration Utility when the
instance is hosted within a Microsoft Windows Service. The default port
number for a Dataphor Server instance is 8061.

[[DUGP1Dataphoria-Aliases-In-ProcessAliases]]
== In-Process Aliases

An in-process server alias indicates that a new Dataphor Server instance
should be hosted within the client process. This mechanism is typically
used by Dataphoria to provide a convenient development environment, but
can also be used in some advanced deployment scenarios.

In addition to session configuration information, in-process aliases
have several properties for server-level configuration:

image::../Images/DataphorServerAliasEditInProcess.bmp[Dataphoria Server Alias Edit In Process]

The port number setting specifies the TCP/IP port on which the new
Dataphor Server instance will listen for connections. The default port
number is 8061.

The catalog directory setting specifies a directory that the Dataphor
Server instance will use to save and load catalog information. If the
catalog directory is unspecified, the Dataphor Server will create a
Catalog directory in the executable directory of the instance.

The library directory setting specifies the directory, or directories
that the Dataphor Server instance will use to search for available
libraries. Use semi-colons to delimit additional library directories.
Each sub-directory of these directories with the appropriate files will
be considered an available library in the Dataphor Server. If the
catalog indicates that a given library was loaded when the server last
started, the library will be loaded at startup. Note that libraries may
be attached from any directory accessible by the Dataphor Server, these
directories simply specify the default paths that will be searched to
display available libraries.

For more information on the System Catalog, refer to the
<<../DevelopersGuide/D4Catalog.adoc#D4LGCatalogElements, Catalog Elements>>
chapter of the D4 Language Guide in the Dataphor Developer's Guide.
For more information on Libraries, refer to the
<<../DevelopersGuide/WorkingWithLibraries.adoc#DDGWorkingWithLibraries, Working with Libraries>>
chapter in the Logical Application Design part of the Dataphor Developer's Guide.

Tracing enabled indicates whether internal tracing of server events is
enabled. Log errors indicates whether the Dataphor Server will log
exceptions that are returned to clients across the CLI boundary.

The Embedded option indicates whether or not this instance of the
Dataphor Server will be available to other processes. If the Embedded
option is set, the instance will only be available within the process
creating the instance. Otherwise, the instance will be available for
external connections, either from other processes running on the same
machine, or remote processes running on different machines.

The Catalog Store Database Name and Password indicate the name and
authentication information for the file used to store the database
catalog.
