= Applications
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book
:toc:
:icons:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[DUGP1Dataphoria-DataphorExplorer-Applications]]
== Summary

The applications node is the root node for all applications. Each
configured application in the Dataphor Server will have an application
node that is a child of this node. The root applications node simply
allows for the addition of a new application, as well as a refresh
command for refreshing the list of applications.

Each application node exposes functionality for managing the properties
of the application, deleting the application, and starting the
application.

A Dataphor application consists of a set of required libraries, a
starting document, and various configuration settings which control
general behavior characteristics of the application and the Frontend
Clients running it.

[[DUGP1CreatingaNewApplication]]
== Creating a New Application

By right-clicking on the applications node and selecting the Add...
command, users can create a new application. The following screen
capture displays the application edit form:

image::../Images/DataphorExplorerApplicationEdit.bmp[Editing a Dataphor Explorer application]

The Description is the user-visible description of the application. When
a Frontend Client connects to a Dataphor Server, the descriptions of the
available applications are displayed, and the user selects which
application to run.

The Start Document is the entry point for the application. It is the
first user-interface that the user running the application will see. All
the functionality required by the application should be available from
this starting point. Once the user closes this main form, the
application is closed and the Frontend Client shuts down.

Another way to create an application is by simply dragging a Dataphor
Form document from the documents node of a library, or a Table node from
the Tables node, and dropping it on the applications node. The
application edit interface will be displayed with the Start Document set
to the document expression required to load the form, or browse the
table, and the library it is in as a required library of the
application.

[[DUGP1WindowsClientSettings]]
=== Windows Client Settings

Applications can also configure certain general settings about the
behavior of the Microsoft Windows Frontend Client. These settings are
available from the Extensions | Windows Client Application Settings
command. The following screen capture shows the result of selecting this
command:

image::../Images/DataphorExplorerWindowsClientSettingsEdit.bmp[Editing Dataphor Explorer Windows Client Settings]

The Theme Document is a D4 expression that specifies a theme document.
Windows themes allow the look and feel of the Windows Client to be
changed. For more information on Windows themes, see the
link:DDGPresentationLayer.html[Presentation Layer] part of the Dataphor
Developer's Guide.

The Default Form Icon Image is a D4 expression that specifies an icon
image to be used as the icon for all the forms in the application.

Document Cache SizeThe Document Cache Size controls the size of the
document caching system built into the Windows Client. Whenever a
document is requested in the Frontend Client, the cache is checked to
see if an appropriate version of the document has already been
downloaded to the client. If so, that version of the document is used
rather than requesting it from the server.

The default size for the document cache is 800 documents. Setting the
cache size to 0 disables the cache. Each application creates and
maintains a different document cache.

Image Cache SizeThe Image Cache Size controls the size of the image
caching system built into the Windows Client. Whenever an image is
requested in the Frontend Client, the cache is checked to see if the
image has already been downloaded to the client. If so, that image is
used rather than requesting it from the server. The default size for
this cache is 60 images. Setting the cache size to 0 disables the cache.

The difference between the two caches is that the document cache still
requires a network round-trip. The document request is still made, but
the version of the document in the cache is sent with the document
request. If the version of the document on the server is the same, the
server does not send the document with the response, and the client
retrieves the document from the cache.

In the image cache, no network round trip is required. If the image has
already been downloaded, it will be used. Because this cache is not
transparent (i.e. changes made to images on the server that have already
been requested by the client will not be re-requested), this cache does
not survive the application session. When the application is re-started,
the image cache will be rebuilt as images are downloaded.

The document cache, on the other hand, is completely transparent and
does survive the application session. When the application is
re-started, the same document cache is used from the last application
session.
