= Dataphor Frontend
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book
:toc:
:icons:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

== Summary

The Dataphor Frontend builds on the foundation provided by the Dataphor
Server to provide automated user-interface support. The Frontend
technologies enable Automated Application Development by dramatically
reducing user-interface development time, allowing applications to be
built and maintained more quickly and easily.

The Frontend clients are "thin", in that there is no
application-specific code in the client. All presentation layer
definitions reside in either dynamically created user-interfaces or form
definitions contained within documents on the Dataphor Server. The
result is a rich client with all the deployment and maintenance
characteristics of a web-based solution.

== Frontend Server

he Frontend Server is a library of services within the Dataphor Server
which exposes the user-interface derivation capabilities of the Dataphor
product. It also introduces the concepts of _documents_ and
_applications_ into the Dataphor Server.

Derivation is the process of using the information in the application
schema to dynamically create user-interfaces for the presentation layer
of an application. The rules used in derivation embody several years of
usable user-interface design. The first forms are navigation-centric, or
browse forms, useful for selecting an individual row representing a
single item. Secondary forms are data-centric, useful for reviewing
and/or editing the data representing a single item.

The Frontend Server exposes the process of derivation to the clients of
the Dataphor application for the manipulation and presentation of the
business model. These user-interfaces are based not only on the
definitions of the data structures within the business model, but on the
relationships between those structures. This means that not only are the
basic forms of an application automatable, but navigation through the
business model from any perspective is also enabled.

Often, complete applications can be built by simply utilizing the
dynamic user-interface derivation and customization capabilities of the
Frontend Server. Dataphor Frontend Clients request user-interface
descriptions (or Dataphor user-Interface Language (DIL) documents) from
the Dataphor Server in much the same way that a web browser requests
HTML documents. This gives a Dataphor Application the same deployment
and maintenance characteristics as an n-tier web solution.
