= Dataphoria
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book
:toc:
:icons:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

. link:Aliases.adoc[Aliases]
. link:DataphorExplorer.adoc[Dataphor Explorer]
. link:DocumentsAndDesigers.adoc[Documents and Designers]

[[DUGP1Dataphoria-Introduction]]
== Introduction

The Dataphoria environment provides access to all the capabilities and
functionality of the Dataphor product. As such this discussion will be
lengthy and involved. The discussion will be driven largely from the
standpoint of covering all the topics, rather than a sequential
exposition of the concepts involved. It will center largely on usability
issues, rather than design topics or development concerns. Topics are
discussed as they are encountered in the tour, and the interested reader
is referred to other areas of the documentation for more detailed
coverage of each concept. For a complete discussion of how to use the
Dataphor product from a development standpoint, refer to the Dataphor
Developer's Guide.

[[DUGP1Dataphoria-Introduction-Environment]]
=== Environment

The following screen capture displays the default state of the IDE on
startup:

image::../Images/Dataphoria.bmp[Dataphoria Client]

There are three main interfaces in the Dataphoria IDE: the Dataphor
Explorer, the designer surface, and the messages view.

The Dataphor Explorer provides a visual interface for managing the
various aspects of a Dataphor Server, from application development to
administration.

The designer surface is the main interface for creating, viewing, and
interacting with documents in libraries in the Dataphor Server.

The messages window provides a common view of all error messages and
warnings from the various designers in the Dataphor IDE. Compiler errors
from D4 scripts, as well as serialization warnings from Dataphor forms
are all displayed here.

In addition to these main interfaces, the Dataphor IDE exposes various
interfaces through the main menu. These include launching new designers,
opening files from disk, and setting configuration options for the IDE.

The help menu allows access to the Dataphor Help Collection, which
includes this manual as well as the Dataphor Developer's Guide, and the
Dataphor Reference. An about box displaying the version of the Dataphor
platform is available from this menu.

Context-sensitive help is available throughout the Dataphoria IDE by
pressing F1.

All the windows in the IDE use a common docking and layout mechanism
which allows the windows to be docked to the Dataphor IDE. While docked,
each window can be pinned in place, or unpinned, allowing the window to
slide out of view while it is not being used. While unpinned, hovering
the mouse over the window's "handle" will cause it to slide back into
view.
