= Frontend Clients
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book
:toc:
:icons:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[DUGP1ProductTour-FrontendClients]]
== Summary

Dataphor Frontend Clients are responsible for two distinct functions.
First, a Frontend Client manages the connectivity and data access for
the presentation layer, and second, it processes Dataphor Form
Documents, rendering them as user-interfaces appropriate for the
platform on which they are running.

The connectivity and data access mechanisms are managed using the Data
Access Layer exposed by the Dataphor Server. This involves managing
connection state with the server, as well as data presentation and state
management such as buffering, and editing data.

The process of rendering user-interfaces is specific to each client, but
all the clients request Dataphor Form Documents from the Dataphor Server
using the Document API exposed by the Frontend Server.

Because the Dataphor Frontend Client architecture is designed to be
consumed from multiple clients, the same application schema will be
available on any general-purpose Dataphor Frontend Client.

[[DUGP1ProductTour-FrontendClients-WindowsClient]]
== Windows Client

The Windows Client is a Windows executable program that communicates
with the Dataphor Server to request user-interface descriptions, and to
retrieve and manipulate the data in the database. The Windows Client
makes use of the Dataphor Data Access Components to provide access to
the Dataphor Server. These components take full advantage of the
application-targeted features exposed by the Dataphor Server.

[[DUGP1ProductTour-FrontendClients-WebClient]]
== Web Client

The Web Client is an ASP.NET web application that provides HTML based
user-interface pages to browser clients. These pages are produced by
combining the DIL documents retrieved from the Frontend Server with data
from an instance of the Dataphor Server. The user-interfaces produced
are very similar to those provided by the Windows client because both
clients consume the same user-interface description. This also means
that customizations to the user-interface descriptions appear across
clients.
