= Process Defaults
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book

:icons:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[DUGP1ProcessDefaults]]
== Introduction

The session configuration information provides several properties which
control the default settings for processes started on the session. Once
the session is connected, changing these settings has no effect.

[[DUGP1DefaultIsolationLevel]]
== DefaultIsolationLevel

The DefaultIsolationLevel property determines the default setting for
the isolation level of processes started on this session. This in turn
determines the isolation level for transactions started on the process
when no isolation level is specified with the begin transaction call.
The following table lists the available isolation levels.

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Isolation Level |Description
|Browse |Also called __read uncommitted__, this isolation level allows
the transaction to read uncommitted data from other transactions. The
transaction will take exclusive locks on data that it writes.

|Cursor Stability |Also called __read committed__, this isolation level
will read only committed data from other transactions. The transaction
will take exclusive locks on data that it writes.

|Isolated |Also called __serializable__, this isolation level guarantees
repeatable reads. The transaction will take exclusive locks on data that
it writes.
|=======================================================================

These isolation levels balance concurrency with contention. The browse
isolation level has low contention, but is subject to certain update
anomalies resulting from the interaction of other transactions. The
higher the isolation level, the better the isolation from other
transactions, but the more contention a transaction running at that
isolation level will cause.

The default setting for this value is Isolated. However, the Frontend
Clients use Browse isolation when it is known that the statement to be
executed will not update any information. For example, scrolling through
data in a browse interface uses Browse isolation. When data modification
statements are executed, the Frontend Clients will use the Isolated
level. In addition, the Frontend Clients use optimistic concurrency
checks to ensure that data that has been read while in browse isolation
has not been changed by other transactions since it was read.

The default isolation level for a session can be set using the
SetDefaultIsolationLevel operator. The current value for the setting can
be retrieved from the Sessions system table.

The default isolation level for a process can be set using the
SetIsolationLevel operator. The current value for the setting can be
retrieved from the Processes system table.

For more information on concurrency and transaction isolation levels,
refer to the link:DDGP1TransactionManagement.html[Transaction
Management] chapter of the Introduction part of the Dataphor Developer's
Guide.

[[DUGP1DefaultMaxCallDepth]]
== DefaultMaxCallDepth

The DefaultMaxCallDepth property determines the default maximum call
depth for processes started on this session. The Dataphor Server
attempts to prevent runaway recursion by limiting the maximum call depth
on any given process.

The default maximum call depth for a session can be set using the
SetDefaultMaxCallDepth operator. The current value for the setting can
be retrieved from the Sessions system table.

The maximum call depth for the current process can be set using the
SetMaxCallDepth operator. The current value for the setting can be
retrieved from the Processes system table.

The default value for this property is 1024.

[[DUGP1DefaultMaxStackDepth]]
== DefaultMaxStackDepth

The DefaultMaxStackDepth property determines the default maximum stack
depth for processes started on this session. The Dataphor Server stack
is a logical stack, meaning that the depth is determined strictly by the
number of items on the stack, not by their relative sizes. This property
prevents a process from overrunning due to recursive calls.

The default maximum stack depth for a session can be set using the
SetDefaultMaxStackDepth operator. The current value for the setting can
be retrieved from the Sessions system table.

The maximum stack depth for the current process can be set using the
SetMaxStackDepth operator. The current value for the setting can be
retrieved from the Processes system table.

The default value for this property is 32767.

[[DUGP1DefaultUseDTC]]
== DefaultUseDTC

The DefaultUseDTC property determines the default UseDTC setting for
processes started on this session. This setting in turn determines
whether or not the Microsoft Distributed Transaction Coordinator (DTC)
will be used to coordinate distributed transactions on the process.

Because of the Dataphor Server's open-ended storage architecture,
transactions must be coordinated with each system involved in a given
operation. This type of transaction is known as a __distributed
transaction__. The Dataphor Server can function as a distributed
transaction coordinator, or it can employ the services of the Microsoft
Distributed Transaction Coordinator (MSDTC), based on the value of this
setting.

The default value for this property is false. It is an error to attempt
to use the Distributed Transaction Coordinator if the platform is not
Microsoft Windows 2000 or later.

For more information on transaction management in the Dataphor Server,
refer to the
<<../DevelopersGuide/ModelingProcessLogic.adoc#DDGModelingProcessLogic-TransactionManagement, Transaction Management>>
section of the Modeling Process Logic chapter of the Logical
Application Design part of the Dataphor Developer's Guide.

[[DUGP1DefaultUseImplicitTransactions]]
== DefaultUseImplicitTransactions

The DefaultUseImplicitTransactions property determines the default
UseImplicitTransactions setting for processes started on this session.
This setting in turn determines whether calls made through the CLI
boundary will start an implicit transaction if one is not started on the
process.

If UseImplicitTransactions is true, every call that crosses the CLI
boundary will ensure that if no transaction is currently in progress on
the process, then one is started. When the call returns, if any
unhandled exceptions occurred, the implicit transaction is rolled back,
otherwise it is committed. Note that any nested transactions started
during the call are rolled back or committed as well. This behavior is
called __transactional call protocol__.

The DefaultUseImplicitTransactions setting can be configured using the
SetDefaultUseImplicitTransactions operator. The current value can be
retrieved from the Sessions system table.

The UseImplicitTransactions setting can be configured using the
SetUseImplicitTransactions operator. The current value can be retrieved
from the Processes system table.

The default value for this property is true. Note that this property
only affects calls that cross the CLI boundary, so setting it within a
statement block will have no affect on subsequent statements within that
block.
