= Using Dataphor Forms
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book
:toc:
:icons:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[DUGP1UsingDataphorApplications-Forms]]
== Summary

Dataphor Applications consist of a collection of user-interfaces called
__forms__. These forms generally fall into three different categories:

* Dashboards
+
Dashboard forms provide access to various functions of the application.
Most applications will begin with a dashboard, or main form, that
provides various starting points for the application.
* Browses
+
Browse forms display a list of items such as employees or accounts.
Browse forms typically allow searching and the ability to manage the
list of items by adding, editing, viewing, and deleting items.
* Views
+
View forms display a single item and any related data such as a single
employee record. View forms can be used to add a new item, as well as
edit or view an existing item.

Of course, these are only general categories. Often, the actual forms in
an application will play multiple roles at once.

[[DUGP1UsingDataphorApplications-Forms-ComponentsofaForm]]
== Form Components

Regardless of the roles being played, all the forms in a Dataphor
Application have certain characteristics in common. The following screen
capture displays the main form for a simple application:

image::../Images/SampleApplicationMainForm.bmp[Sample Application - Main Form]

The topmost section of the form is called the __title bar__. On the left
side of the title bar, the form's icon is displayed. Single clicking the
icon shows the _system menu_ for the form. This menu exposes
capabilities such as minimizing the form, maximizing it and closing it.
Double-clicking the form's icon will also close the form.

Next along the title bar is the title, or _caption_ of the form. This
caption will typically contain text describing the action that is being
performed by the form, for example Add Contact or Browse Organizations.

On the right side of the title bar, the form has three buttons for
minimizing, maximizing or restoring, and closing the form, respectively.

Note that the title bar is a feature of forms in the Windows Client
because each form is a _window_ in the Microsoft Windows Environment.

Immediately below the title bar is the _menu bar_ containing the
available menu commands. All forms will have a Form menu that contains
form management commands. Most forms will have additional menu items
such as navigation or view menus.

Below the menu bar, each form has a _tool bar_ that exposes commonly
used commands as tool bar buttons.

The bottommost section of the form is called the __status bar__. The
status bar will typically display hints or other information about the
current state of the form. On the left side of the status bar is a panel
which displays a description of the currently selected control. The
right side of the status bar displays a message about navigating through
the form.

The rest of the area within the form is called the _client area_ and
contains the main contents of the form. This will typically be filled
with __controls__, or user-interface elements such as text boxes and
buttons.

Surrounding the entire form is a thin margin called the __border__. When
hovering the mouse over the border, the cursor will change to indicate
that the border can be dragged to resize the window.

[[DUGP1UsingDataphorApplications-Forms-NavigatingForms]]
== Form Navigation

When a form is initially displayed, the first control on the form is
currently selected, or __focused__. The focused control is the one that
will receive keyboard input. Focusing a control can be accomplished
simply by clicking on it with the mouse. Advancing focus to the next
control is done by pressing the Tab or Enter key.

Within a Dataphor Application, each form can be in one of two modes. If
the form is waiting for user input, or the data on the form is modified,
the form is in _accept-reject_ mode. While in this mode, the buttons
available on the tool bar will be Accept and Reject instead of Close.
Accepting the form will accept any outstanding changes and close the
form. Rejecting the form will cancel the changes and close the form.
Note that the accelerator Alt+C will close the form in both modes,
corresponding to the Accept in accept-reject mode. The Esc key will also
close the form in both modes, corresponding to the Reject in
accept-reject mode.

The right side of the status bar at the bottom of the form will display
a key combination to perform some common action on the form, such as
advancing to the next control, or accepting the form.

In addition to the basic controls for editing values, forms can include
organizational controls such as a __group__, or a __page control__.
Groups provide a visual grouping of a set of controls and do not have
any special behavior.

Page controls allow multiple user-interfaces to be embedded into a
single space using tabs to allow for the selection of the embedded
user-interfaces. The following screen capture provides an example of
this type of control:

image::../Images/SampleApplicationAddPerson.bmp[Sample Application - Add Person]

This form shows a group for the address, as well as a page control
displaying phone numbers, associated organizations, websites, and email
addresses. Each embedded user-interface can be selected by clicking on a
tab in the page control. While focused on a control within a tab, the
page control can be navigated using Ctrl+Tab to select the next tab, and
Ctrl+Shift+Tab to select the previous tab.

[[DUGP1UsingDataphorApplications-Forms-Singular-PluralForms]]
== Using Browse Forms

Browse forms enable navigation of items, incremental searching for a
specific item, and management including adding, editing, and deleting
items. The following screen capture displays a simple browse form:

image::../Images/SampleApplicationBrowsePersonPhoneType.bmp[Sample Application - Browse Person - Phone Type]

[[DUGNavigation]]
=== Navigation

The grid control provides basic navigation of a list of items. The
currently selected row in the grid is indicated by the highlighted row.
In addition to navigating the grid with the mouse using the scroll bar
on the right side of the grid, the following keystrokes can be used to
perform navigation:

[cols=",",options="header",]
|================================================
|Key |Action
|Home |Navigates to the beginning of the list.
|PgUp |Scrolls the grid one page up.
|Up Arrow |Moves the selected row one row up.
|Down Arrow |Moves the selected row one row down.
|PgDn |Scrolls the grid one page down.
|End |Navigates to the end of the list.
|================================================

All these keystrokes are available when the grid is the focused control.
In addition, the PgUp, PgDn, Up Arrow and Down Arrow keystrokes can be
used when the search control above the grid is focused.

The browse form also introduces a Navigation menu that contains First,
Prior, Next, and Last commands, as well as a Refresh command that can be
used to refresh the contents of the grid.

As the screen capture above shows, the grid column titles display a
direction indicator that shows the direction of the order of the rows in
the grid. Clicking on the grid column title will sort the rows of the
grid by that column. Note that this functionality is only available if
the application allows sorting the contents of the grid by that specific
column. Clicking on a grid column title that is already sorted will
reverse the sort order, and the direction indicator will change
accordingly.

[[DUGSearch]]
=== Search

Directly above the grid is a _search_ control, that can be used to
incrementally search for a specific item in the list by the search
criteria. The search criteria is the same as the sort order used to
display the list. The lookup button on the far right side of the search
control displays the list of available sort orders. The following screen
capture shows a typical order browse:

image::../Images/SampleApplicationPersonPhoneTypeOrderBrowse.bmp[Sample Application - Browse Order - Person Phone Type]

When the search control is focused, the list can be searched by typing
in the desired criteria:

image::../Images/SampleApplicationBrowsePersonPhoneTypeSearch.bmp[Sample Application - Browse Person - Phone Type - Search]

The search control waits until the criteria has been entered, and then
searches the list for the first row that matches the given search
criteria. If a match is found, the unspecified portion of the matching
value is added to the end of the entered search criteria and
highlighted. Continuing to type will replace the highlighted portion of
the criteria and continue the search.

Note that although this example illustrates searching based on a single
value, the search control allows for multiple-value searches as well.

Pressing Enter anywhere on the browse form will execute the _default
action_ for the form. If the browse form is in accept-reject state, this
will accept the form. Otherwise, the default action will edit the
currently selected row.

Pressing Esc anywhere on the browse form will close the form. If the
form is in accept-reject state, this is equivalent to pressing the
Reject button.

[[DUGManagement]]
=== Management

In addition to searching and navigation, browse forms will typically
allow the list of items to be edited. The following buttons are usually
available on the panel to the right of the grid control:

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Command |Action
|Add |Displays a form for adding a new item.

|Edit |Displays a form for editing the current item.

|Delete |Displays a confirm delete form, and deletes the item if
accepted.

|View |Displays a read-only view of the current item.
|=======================================================================

[[DUGP1UsingDataphorApplications-Forms-Browse-to-EditPattern]]
== Browse-to-Edit Pattern
Pattern

By clearly defining the role of each type of form in an application, the
overall flow through the user-interfaces follows an intuitive and
flexible pattern called __browse-to-edit__. As the name indicates, the
pattern begins with a browse form, and all editing of the items
displayed is done using a form built expressly for adding, editing, or
viewing.

In addition, the add, edit, view, and delete forms that manage the data
manipulation from the browse are shown __modally__. This means that the
original browse form that launched the edit form cannot be reached until
the edit form is closed, either accepted or rejected. This does not mean
that other browse forms in the application that are already open cannot
be reached, only that the browse form that launched the edit form is
hidden. This allows multiple "threads" to be run within a single
application.

[[DUGP1UsingDataphorApplications-Forms-WhatFormsMean]]
== Common Patterns

Typically, each form will correspond with some type of data in the
application such as an employee record. The various forms in the
application will present different perspectives of the data. Regardless
of the perspective, each type of data in the application may be related
to other types of data, for example employees have email addresses, work
in departments, and perform tasks.

These relationships can be loosely categorized as:

* Details
* Extensions
* Parents/Lookups

[[DUGP1Details]]
=== Details

A _detail_ is a "has many" relationship. For example an employee may
have multiple email addresses or phone numbers. The Details menu will be
available whenever there are detail relationships that can be followed.
For example, when viewing the employee form, the details menu will
contain a menu item to allow the list of email addresses for the
employee to be displayed.

Note that if an email address is added from the detail browse, the
employee does not need to be specified as it can be obtained from the
employee form that was used to launch the detail.

[[DUGP1Extensions]]
=== Extensions

An _extension_ is a "has one" relationship. The Extensions menu will be
available whenever there are extension relationships that can be
followed. For example, when viewing the employee form, the extensions
menu will contain a menu item to allow the address of the employee to be
displayed, and possibly edited.

As with the detail relationships, the information about how the
extension is related to the launching form is automatically maintained
by the application.

[[DUGP1Parents-Lookups]]
=== Parents/Lookups

_Lookup_ relationships indicate a category or type. For example, a phone
number has a phone number type. The phone number type is a list of
values for the type of each phone number. For example, "home" or
"mobile" phone number. The View menu will be available whenever there
are parent or lookup relationships that can be followed. For example,
when viewing a phone number, the view menu will contain a menu item to
allow the phone number type of the phone number to be displayed.

Note that the category of a relationship is a matter of perspective
within the application. For example, from the perspective of a phone
number type, the phone numbers of that type are a detail. Typically, a
Dataphor Application will allow relationships to be viewed from any
perspective.
