= Application Development Concepts
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book
:toc:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts]]
== Summary

This chapter discusses how the declarative approach can be applied to
application development by utilizing the logical model exposed by a
relational database management system. It describes how this approach
addresses the issues discussed in the link:DDGApplicationDevelopmentConsiderations.html[Application
Development Considerations] chapter of this part, and how a declarative
platform provides a foundation for Automated Application Development
(AAD).

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Schema]]
== Application Schema

The logical model presented by a relational database management system
allows for the complete definition of the structural components of any
application. It allows for the definition of data types, operators,
tables, views, and business-rules that together constitute the schema
(or business model) of the application, and completely model the
structure of the data, the integrity constraints to be enforced, as well
as any process logic specific to the application. Collectively, this
declarative definition of the application is called the __application
schema__.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Schema-DataTypes]]
=== Data Types

Data types provide the fundamental unit of data representation within
the logical model. They allow the developer to describe the types of
data of interest to the application. Of course, the database system
provides some basic data types such as strings and integers, but it
should also allow for the definition of new data types of arbitrary
complexity. For example, if the application must deal with spatial data,
a coordinate type could be introduced to model geographic coordinates.

Conceptually, a data type is a set of values. These values have various
kinds of representations such as the physical representation of the
value that is internal to the system, and the logical representation of
the value that is exposed in the application schema. This distinction
allows the implementation, or physical representation, of values to be
changed without affecting the usage of the value in the application
schema. An ideal platform would allow not only for the definition of
data types, but the description of the various representations of values
of those types as well.

Once a data type is available in the schema of an application, that data
type can be used anywhere within the application. It can serve as the
type of a column in a table or view, it can be used within the
definition of an operator as the declared type of a local variable, and
it can also be used as the declared type of a parameter to an operator.
By defining a data type, the application developer allows the system to
model values of the type in question.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Schema-Operators]]
=== Operators

Operators allow the developer to define and reuse the behavior of the
application. Conceptually, an operator is just a predefined set of steps
to be taken. Once defined, an operator can be invoked from anywhere
within the application. From an imperative programming standpoint,
operators provide an abstraction over statements and expressions of the
language, meaning that anywhere statements and expressions can appear,
operator invocations can appear in their place.

For example, a distance operator could be defined to determine the
distance between two coordinates. The entire application can then make
use of the distance calculation, simply by invoking the operator.
Whether in a restriction clause in a view definition, or deep within the
processing logic of the application, the same operator can be used.

Operators generally come in two varieties, those that return values, and
those that do not. Some languages make the distinction explicit by
defining functions as operators that return values, and procedures as
operators that do not. Others simply introduce a special _void_ type to
indicate that a given operator does not return a value. In either case,
the concept is the same.

Operators are also allowed to take parameters, and can optionally update
the values of those parameters (if the parameter is a variable, of
course). Operators can take any number of parameters, including none,
and those parameters are allowed to be of any type. The result of an
operator, if any, is also allowed to be of any type.

Some operators are generally considered part of the language definition.
These are generally called _built-in_ operators and include such
functions as + and -.

Because operators can appear anywhere statements and expressions can
appear, they can be used to define other elements of the application
schema. For example, operators can reference other operators, constraint
and view definitions can invoke operators, and so on. Using operators,
the developer can completely describe the required behavior of any
application.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Schema-TablesAndViews]]
=== Tables and Views

Tables and views (or derived tables) provide the fundamental unit of
structure within the logical model. Tables and views are both __relation
variables__, differing only in how they are defined. A table is defined
in terms of the columns it contains, while a view is defined in terms of
some relational expression. Once defined, tables and views behave the
same. They are interchangeable, meaning that anywhere a reference to a
table can appear, a reference to a view can appear. In particular, this
is true of data modification statements.

This feature of a relational system is called _logical data
independence_ and is one of the key enabling factors in automated
application development. In particular, it means that the client
portions of the application can always deal with data in the database in
the same way. Whether that data is defined in terms of a base table, or
an arbitrarily complex view, the application will always see a relation.
This uniformity of data access allows much of the presentation layer to
be completely automated.

As an example of logical data independence, consider a simple contact
management application. Suppose the applications contains a customer
table with a column for the associated region such as _East Coast_ or
__West Coast__. A view of east coast customers can be created using a
simple restriction. The resulting view behaves exactly the same as the
actual customer table, except that only east coast customers are
available.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Schema-BusinessRules]]
=== Business Rules

Business rules allow the developer to declaratively specify the meaning
of the data in the model. Once the system knows what business-rules must
be enforced, it is responsible for rejecting any modifications that
would violate those rules.

Business-rules generally come in two varieties: constraints, and
stimulus-response rules. Constraints specify some condition that must
always hold, while stimulus-response rules allow the system to take
action in response to some event such as a data modification.

[[DDGConstraints]]
==== Constraints

Constraints generally take the form of some expression that must
evaluate to true. Constraints can be placed on data types, as well as on
the database as a whole. For practical reasons, database constraints can
be declared at many different levels. The following list illustrates
these possibilities:

* Type Constraints
+
As Application Schema
+
Type Constraints
* Column Constraints
+
As Application Schema
+
Column Constraints
* Row Constraints
+
As Application Schema
+
Row Constraints
* Table Constraints
+
As Application Schema
+
Table Constraints
* Transition Constraints
+
As Application Schema
+
Transition Constraints
* Database Constraints
+
As Application Schema
+
Database Constraints

Type constraints are concerned with defining the set of valid values of
a given data type. For example, the SSN type could ensure that values of
type SSN have 9 digits, with dashes in the appropriate places.

Column constraints are concerned with defining the set of valid values
for a given column. Of course, this constraint is in addition to the
implicit constraint defined by the data type of the column.

Row constraints allow the developer to specify constraints that are
concerned with multiple columns in a single row. For example, the ToDate
must be greater than the FromDate.

Table constraints define the valid values for a particular table. A
common example of a table constraint is a _key_ constraint, indicating
that no two rows in the same table may have the same values for the
columns in the key.

Transition constraints define the valid _transitions_ for data in the
database. For example, a person's marital status may change from
_married_ to __divorced__, but not from _married_ to __single__.

Database constraints allow rules to be enforced that involve multiple
tables in the database. A common example of a database constraint is a
_referential integrity_ constraint, indicating that every row in one
table must have a corresponding row in another table.

The majority of business-rules are constraints, and a system which
allowed for the declarative enforcement of all these types of
constraints would eliminate a significant amount of development effort.
Rather than enforcing these rules on a case-by-case basis within the
presentation layer, the system would simply ensure that no modification
is allowed that would violate any declared rule. The result is that the
presentation layer can be developed without regard for enforcing
integrity.

[[DDGStimulus-ResponseRules]]
==== Stimulus-Response Rules

Stimulus-Response rules allow the developer to participate in the
decisions to be made when modifications occur in the system. For
example, an inventory control system could automatically place an order
whenever the in-stock quantity of an item falls below a certain level.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Schema-Metadata]]
=== Metadata

In addition to these elements of the logical model, the schema of a
given application could be extended with additional data about the data
or __metadata__. These attributes (or __tags__) would allow
application-specific information to be associated with any level of the
application schema. For example, a phone number data type could include
a metadata tag indicating that the display title for columns of this
type is __Phone #__.

By associating this metadata directly with the application schema it
becomes available anywhere within the application, rather than tucked
away in the definition of various forms in the presentation layer. This
centralization improves the maintenance cycle as well. For example, if
the title is supposed to be __Phone #/Ext__, the change can be made one
time in the application schema, and the presentation layer would react
to the change appropriately.

This association with the application schema would also allow the
relational system's type inference mechanism to be extended to include
metadata inference. For example, the metadata associated with a column
definition in a table could be inferred through any view that involved
that column.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Presentation]]
== Presentation

The presentation layer of any application is responsible for interaction
with the users. It must provide services to allow users to enter,
retrieve and maintain data, and perform the processes involved in the
application. In short, it must provide a consistent and intuitive
interface to the schema of the application.

Many of the most difficult and tedious issues in application development
arise in this layer. The presentation layer is responsible for
retrieving the data from the database, presenting it to the user,
allowing the user to interact with the data, and then updating the data
in the database. In general, this process presents many difficult
challenges. However, by layering the solution on top of the relational
model and building on existing rapid application development techniques,
a highly automated solution can be achieved.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Presentation-DataAccessLayer]]
=== Data Access LayerPresentationData Access LayerData Access Layer

The first layer that must be automated is the data access layer. This is
often called push/pull code, because it involves pulling data out of the
database, changing or presenting it in some way, and then pushing it
back into the database. This process necessarily involves the
transformation of data from the values that the system understands, into
a format suitable for presentation purposes, and back again. It also
involves buffering the data in the client while it is being presented to
or manipulated by users, and maintaining various state such as whether
or not the data is being edited, the position within the result set, and
so on.

[[DDGRepresentations]]
==== Representations

Recall that the logical model provides for the definition of
representations of types. This mechanism provides an excellent solution
for the presentation layer, in that the display representation of a
particular type of value can be defined in the application schema. If
the client consuming the data is aware of the concept of a
representation, an appropriate representation can be selected for use in
the presentation layer. It could even download the code to translate
values to and from the display representation to the client so that the
development could remain on the server, while the transformation
actually takes place on the client.

For example, suppose the coordinate type exposes a string representation
suitable for presentation layer usage. The logic required to transform a
string to and from a coordinate value is contained within the definition
of the representation. The client could simply access this definition
and use it to perform the required translation. The user sees a
presentation layer representation of the coordinate value such as __100
10' 5.4"__, and is allowed to enter a coordinate value using the same
format.

Because the implementation for the representation is housed centrally
with the application schema, changing the presentation layer format is
simply a matter of updating the definition of the representation. The
automated presentation layer reacts to the change appropriately.

[[DDGTable-LevelAccess]]
==== Table-Level Access

Because the logical model exposes data as tables, all presentation and
manipulation can be accomplished through a table-level access mechanism.
One possible mechanism for this interaction is known as a __cursor__. A
cursor provides a row-level interface for accessing the data from an
arbitrary result set. Cursors expose navigational functionality such as
moving to the next row, and support retrieving the currently selected
row. In addition, a cursor could expose functionality for searching and
updating data.

One distinct advantage of using cursors over other potential data access
mechanisms is that they provide a __relative__, rather than an
_absolute_ positioning mechanism. This allows the client to deal with
result sets of arbitrary size, and enables more general searching and
buffering mechanisms. These in turn allow more of the data access layer
to be automated within the client framework.

[[DDGClient-ServerInteraction]]
==== Client-Server Interaction

In addition to these basic services, the data access layer of a
declarative platform could provide extensive mechanisms for interaction
between the client and the server. The application schema exposes a
tremendous amount of detail about the data. What it should look like,
how it should be displayed, what other data is related, default values,
business-rules, and so on. Clearly, any application that deals with such
a model should, as much as possible, be based on the structures of the
application schema.

In order to enable more automation in the clients, the data access layer
could expose services for server participation in client interfaces. For
example, when inserting a new row, the client could ask the server to
provide default values for any columns in the table. Validation rules
could also be checked in this way, enabling a much more sophisticated
user interface, without additional developer effort. The data access
layer could automatically invoke these services when necessary.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Presentation-EnforcingBusiness-Rules]]
=== Enforcing Business Rules

Even a moderately complex application will likely include business-rules
that span table variables in the database. For example, an employee
cannot belong to a department that does not exist, and so on. However,
these types of constraints necessarily involve some mechanism for
deferred constraint checking, usually transactions. The constraints are
allowed to be violated within the transaction, and then checked at
transaction commit. If the constraint is violated, the transaction is
rolled-back, and an error is raised.

While this approach to enforcement works when developing server-side
logic, the data entry patterns produced by the natural navigation of the
relationships in the database tend to violate these types of
constraints. For example, when entering an employee, an item in the list
of phone numbers for the employee is "posted" through the data access
layer while the employee itself is still being "inserted" in the client
interface. This leads to a constraint violation, and the developer is
usually left to resolve the problem in client-side code.

In a declarative system, the system could determine which constraints
would be violated by such a transaction, and provide an optimistically
concurrent transaction to buffer the input of the data until all data is
present, then utilize a standard transaction to post the entire batch.
If the data access layer then exposed these services, the clients could
automatically take advantage of them, all without developer
intervention.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Presentation-SearchInterfaces]]
=== Search Interfaces

One of the most difficult interfaces in any application is the generic
search. For example, provide the user with the ability to locate an
arbitrary contact by name or SSN within the entire organization. If the
contact table contains millions of rows, this becomes a non-trivial
task, usually resolved by filtering on a case-by-case basis within the
presentation layer.

If the data access layer provided a mechanisms for relative positioning
of the cursor, and sufficient services for searching within the result
set, then the clients could provide a "sliding window" over a given
result set, ordered by some criteria. The client and server could work
together to ensure that only the data the client actually requested was
retrieved (not the whole table). This solution not only provides the
end-user with an intuitive incremental search, but utilizes network and
database resources efficiently and scales well both in terms of users
and data volume, all without developer intervention.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Presentation-User-InterfaceDerivation]]
=== User-Interface Derivation

If all these services could be provided generically for arbitrary
perspectives of the application schema, then the benefits of logical
data independence can be applied not only to expressions and statements
within the server-side process logic, but to the user interfaces
produced in the presentation layer consuming the application schema. In
other words, the declarative approach, if properly realized, enables the
automation of user interfaces based on the definitions contained within
the application schema.

In it's simplest form, user interface derivation involves analyzing the
structure and metadata of a given result set, and producing a
user interface based on that structure. Note that due to the type and
metadata inference mechanisms of the relational system, this process
will work for _arbitrary_ expressions, not just base tables.

In addition to these basic elements, the system could analyze the
relationship of a given result set with the structures in the
application schema, and provide appropriate user interface elements for
navigating the relationships of the application schema. For example,
because the employee types table is referenced by the type column of the
employee table, the resulting user interface could provide a lookup into
the employee types table, simply based on the existence of the reference
constraint. Again, because of type inference, this process will work for
arbitrary expressions, not just base tables. A view of the employees
table will still be aware of the lookup to the employee types table.

Ideally, this process will produce a complete and intuitive
user interface for manipulating the application schema. However, there
may be cases where the resulting user interfaces will not meet the
requirements of the application. In order to address this issue, the
declarative system must provide mechanisms for steering this process.
Such mechanisms may include the use of metadata in the appropriate
places in the application schema, customizing the appearance of the
resulting interfaces, or, in the most extreme cases, departing from the
process entirely and reverting to manually building user interfaces. If
the platform is layered properly, then the services enabled by the data
access layer will still be available when customizing derived
user interfaces or building user interfaces manually.

Additionally, as new user interface patterns are encountered, the system
could be extended to handle them in future applications, resulting in
continual improvement of user interface automation as the system
evolves.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-PhysicalRealization]]
== Physical Realization

In addition to the application schema and presentation layers, any
application must ultimately run in some production environment. These
environments often change rapidly, forcing changes in the applications.
By utilizing a platform based on the declarative approach, the
application can be defined one time. Changes in the software
environments can be handled by the system, rather than the application.
To redeploy the application onto a new platform, only the system must
change, not each application built on that system.

Physical realization also involves potential integration problems. Data
required by the application may already be housed in existing external
sources, and the costs of migrating the data and associated logic may be
prohibitive. The platform must provide the ability to treat data in the
same way regardless of where it is located, or what type of system it is
housed within. This would result in a high degree of physical data
independence, which would allow data from any source to be consumed by
clients of the system. This physical data independence would also allow
an existing application to be redeployed onto a completely different
storage system with little or no modification.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Development]]
== Development

In addition to the benefits already discussed in the previous sections,
the declarative approach provides several benefits related to the
development process itself. These benefits are chiefly due to the high
degree of physical and logical data independence that are achieved by
such a system. Some of these benefits include:

* Productivity
+
Because the system can automate large portions of the development
process, the obvious initial benefit is development time. Both
development time and maintenance time are dramatically reduced.
Developers can spend more time solving the actual problems presented by
the application, rather than wrestling with the details of the
implementation.
* Deployment
+
Deployment of an application based on a declarative platform is simply a
matter of deploying the definition of the application to the system.
* Maintenance
+
The centralized schema and automated user interface derivation features
of the system allow changes to the application schema to be made without
necessarily having to make the corresponding changes to the presentation
layer. The applications simply react to the change. These changes could
be automatically coordinated with the physical layer as well.
* Training
+
Due to platform independence, the software environment of the
application can change without the need to re-train developers on the
new software environment. They still utilize the same conceptual
environment exposed by the system.

It is worth pointing out that the declarative approach is by no means a
panacea. It is not a "silver bullet" that will automatically develop
applications. It is a layer of abstraction over existing development
methodologies that allows applications to be implemented at a higher
conceptual level. In other words, there is no substitute for good
architecture, and care must be taken to express the model completely and
accurately within a given declarative framework. The goal of the
declarative approach is to simplify the implementation of a given
architecture by encapsulating whenever possible the details of that
implementation within the system.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConcepts-Conclusions]]
== Conclusions

This chapter has focused on how the declarative approach to application
development can be utilized to solve many of the issues faced in
software development. As with any large systems software, the ideal
declarative platform is a moving target. However, the evolution of
application development depends on taking steps towards a more
declarative paradigm. Once the platform exists, it will continue to
improve as optimizations are made, and new application development
patterns are formalized and automated. In other words, it is a platform
that evolves to handle new situations, rather than re-inventing
solutions to problems that have already been solved.
