= Application Development Considerations
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book
:toc:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConsiderations]]
== Summary

This chapter examines many of the issues associated with application
development and considers the declarative approach as a solution to
these problems.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConsiderations-WhatisanApplication]]
== What is an Application?

In the most general terms, an application is simply a computer-based
model of some aspect of the real world designed to solve a specific set
of problems. Computing technology has given rise to an ever-increasing
number of applications in almost every aspect of life, from the most
mundane address books, to the information systems required to track the
business processes of an entire enterprise. Regardless of the size or
complexity of applications, they all have a common purpose: the
manipulation, analysis, and persistence of data.

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConsiderations-IdentifyingtheIssues]]
== Identifying the Issues

Given this general definition of an application, it is clear that data
management plays a large role in any application. As such, every
application must address at least some of the following issues:

[horizontal]
Persistence:: The data must be stored for an extended period of time.
Integrity:: The data must be correct, according to some defined set of
rules.
Concurrency:: Coordinating read and change requests from multiple users.
Scalability:: The application must scale in terms of number of users,
volume of data, and data complexity.
Performance:: Providing efficient access to the application data.
Recovery:: Ensuring that the data can survive application and system
failures.
Security:: Preventing unauthorized access or manipulation of the
application data.
Reporting:: Providing general analysis and presentation of the
application data to support decision making within the organization.
Integration:: Allowing the application to interact with other software
systems.
Presentation:: Providing a user interface for entry and manipulation of
the application data.

In addition to these problems, the application will inevitably encounter
change of some form:

[horizontal]
Requirements Change:: Modifying the application to fit new or changing
business needs.
Environment Change:: Reacting to changes in the hardware or software
environment.

In building applications that handle all these issues, we also encounter
development process issues that must be addressed:

[horizontal]
Developer Productivity:: Ensuring maximum productivity of application
team members.
Developer Training:: Training team members on the platforms and
technologies to be used.
Application Quality:: Ensuring the application meets requirements and
functionality.
Deployment:: Providing installation and deployment for the
application.
Maintenance:: Providing a maintenance path for deployed applications.

Clearly, application development in general is an extremely complex
problem. The more complex the application, the more difficult the
solution to these problems becomes. Fortunately, these solutions can,
for the most part, be generally implemented in systems-level software
that all applications can utilize. Many of these issues, such as
persistence, concurrency, scalability, and others, are already addressed
to varying degrees by existing systems; however, there are still many
issues that arise when developing applications against these systems:

[horizontal]
Schema Duplication:: Presentation layers often duplicate the structures
and logic already present in the database schema.
Complex Business Rules:: Existing systems often do not provide
effective support for complex business rules.
Client-Side Enforcement of Business Rules - Presentation layers must
provide initial enforcement of business rules.
Client-Side Buffering:: Presentation layers must provide a mechanism
for data retrieval, display, entry and translation.

Traditionally, these problems have been resolved on a case-by-case basis
within each application. The result is large amounts of
application-specific code that is difficult to produce and maintain. If
a general purpose solution to these issues can be found, it can be
__automated__, just as many of the issues relating to data management
have been automated by Database Management Systems (DBMSs).

[[DDGApplicationDevelopmentConsiderations-WhatistheSolution]]
== What is the Solution?

Historically, application development has evolved over time by
increasing the level of abstraction at which applications are built. For
example, the very earliest programs were built with machine languages
(First-Generation Languages or 1GLs). Application logic was developed
directly in the language of the hardware. This was replaced by assembly
languages (2GLs), and then again by compiled languages such as C and
Pascal (3GLs), and so on. Each successive generation of languages hides
the details and complexity of the levels below it. In this way,
application development has become more and more __declarative__,
meaning that we state simply _what_ is to be done, not _how_ it should
be accomplished.

Another example of this trend towards the declarative, rather than
procedural approach is the evolution of database management
technologies. The earliest systems dealt principally with sequential
files. These were later replaced by indexed access (ISAM systems), then
again by network and hierarchic systems, and eventually SQL-based
systems. Each of these steps represents a higher level of abstraction.
Rather than dealing with pointers and file I/O, application developers
simply describe the structure of the data involved. The system, not the
application, is responsible for performing the various data management
tasks required.

These examples illustrate the value of the declarative approach. By
simply describing what is to be accomplished, the system is able to
realize the implementation. This automation is enabled by framing the
solution in general terms. For example, a compiler is able to translate
programs into machine language because the programs are expressed in a
formal system that the compiler understands. The database system is able
to automate data management tasks because the data to be stored is
described in a model that can capture the essence of the problem. In
other words, if the solution to a given problem can be formalized, it
can be automated: formalization enables automation.

So what is the next step in this evolution towards declarative
development? What mechanisms will enable further automation of
application development? Clearly, the answer lies in the formalization
of the concepts used in application development: an approach that allows
applications to be expressed __declaratively__. This model must allow
for the definition of any data, it must allow for arbitrary manipulation
of that data, and it must allow rules about that data to be expressed.
Ideally, this model would also be as simple as possible.

A brief survey of the current computing landscape reveals a myriad of
different technologies for automating various aspects of the application
development process. From object-oriented programming techniques to
SQL-based database design methodologies and everything in between. The
more declarative of these approaches is found in current database
systems. This is due to the model on which these systems are based, the
Relational Model. Simply put, the Relational Model is mathematics
applied to database management. The result is a simple and complete
mechanism for describing and manipulating any data, as well as an
excellent environment for declaratively enforcing rules about that data.
It also provides various kinds of independence, such as logical and
physical data independence. This independence is what enables the
automation and declarativeness provided by these systems. If this same
independence can be utilized to enable the declarative approach to
application development, the resulting paradigm would provide a
development platform that addressed many, if not all of the issues
raised in the previous section.

So the ideal solution is the declarative approach to application
development. Specifically, that solution should be based on The
Relational Model. In this way, the platform begins with a solid
foundation for data management, and then builds on that foundation to
provide various application development services such as the
presentation layer. Throughout this manual, the resulting paradigm is
called _automated application development_ and represents the next step
in the evolution of application development technology beyond current
_rapid application development_ or RAD. The next chapter discusses the
data management foundation of the solution. The Application Development
Concepts chapter then illustrates how a declarative solution based on
the relational model addresses each of the issues discussed in this
chapter.
