= Comparison With SQL
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book

:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL]]
== Summary

This section provides a comparison between the D4 and SQL languages. For
users familiar with SQL, this section provides a quick-start to D4, as
it explains how the constructs of SQL are expressed in D4. In addition,
this section highlights many of the important features of the D4
language which are not available in SQL. This section has the following
basic outline:

* Introduction
+
This section provides a brief overview of the two languages and provides
a high-level comparison.
* Common SQL
+
This section introduces a hypothetical SQL dialect called Common SQL.
This language will provide a concrete syntax that can be used to
demonstrate and explain the differences between SQL and D4.
* Vendor Dialects
+
This section introduces several of the more popular dialects of SQL, and
highlights the idiosynchrasies of each.
* Mapping an SQL Query Into D4
+
This section describes how each component of an SQL query can be mapped
into D4 operators.
* Data Management Differences
+
This section describes some of the fundamental differences between the
way the two languages deal with data.

Note: This section is _not_ intended for users who are not familiar with
SQL. If the reader does not already know SQL fairly well, he or she
would do better not to read this section.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-Introduction]]
== Introduction

SQL was first developed as a prototype interface for use with the System
R project from IBM. As such, it was never intended to be a production
language for use in real applications. It was designed to be _some_
interface for a relational prototype that would serve to convince the
world that relational database management was a viable technology [6].

D4, on the other hand, was built from the very beginning as a solution
to everyday data management problems faced by application developers. It
is especially significant that the designers of D4 have extensive
backgrounds in database application development using SQL-based DBMSs.
The entire Dataphor product evolved from a set of in-house software
development tools used to develop commercial applications. The logical
model for the D4 language is based on The Third Manifesto, by C. J. Date
and Hugh Darwen. The syntax of D4 is based largely on Pascal and
Tutorial D, a hypothetical syntax used in The Third Manifesto as a
vehicle for describing the concepts. D4 is an 'Industrial D' as
described in The Third Manifesto.

In addition, SQL was designed as a 'database sublanguage.' It was
intended to be used from 3GL programming environments as a means of
retrieving and manipulating data in the database. As such, it had no
facilities for imperative programming. This implies that application
development is done in one language, while data manipulation is done in
another. This disparity of language environments is called __impedance
mismatch__.

D4 is really just an imperative programming language where one of the
types of data that can be described is a table. As a result,
applications can be developed entirely in D4, with no resulting
impedance mismatch.

The following table briefly lists some of the ways in which D4 differs
from SQL (the standard as well as the major implementations of that
standard):

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|D4 |SQL
|Uses the relational algebra |Mixed calculus and algebra

|Tables are sets of rows |Tables are allowed to contain duplicates.

|Highly orthogonal (easy to learn and use) |Complex rules and exceptions

|Intrinsic imperative language |Proprietary extensions to support
imperative programming
|=======================================================================

In addition to the syntactic differences between the two languages,
there are numerous features of D4 that are not supported by, or are
poorly implemented in SQL such as user-defined types, user-defined
functions, user-defined aggregate functions, exception-handling,
user-defined relational operators, updatable views, support for quota
queries, etc.,. There are numerous criticisms of SQL in the literature,
and we will not endeavour to repeat them here, except as it pertains to
the functionality being described. The interested reader is referred to
the References section of this manual.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL]]
== Common SQL

In order to illustrate the differences between SQL and D4, we must agree
on a common dialect of SQL to perform the comparison. Because the
standard version of SQL has never been completely implemented, we use
the __lowest common denominator__, or that portion of the language that
all the various dialects support in some form or another. We call this
hypothetical language __Common SQL__. Note that Common SQL does not
exist, even in principle, as even when two dialects support a common
feature set, they may have different syntax for the same feature. As
such, we make no claim that this dialect is standard in any way, or that
it could be used to communicate with any actual DBMS. It is merely a
pedagogical tool for use in demonstrating the differences between the
de-facto standard SQL and D4.

Firstly, we make explicit the fact that we will only be discussing the
data manipulation language statements of SQL. In practice, the Dataphor
Server must also communicate using data definition language (and the
syntactic variations here are even more profound than for DML), but here
we will only concern ourselves with the data manipulation aspects of
each language.

Secondly, we assume that we will only be discussing single statements.
The rules for grouping statements into execution blocks also differ for
each dialect and DBMS, and so we will only be concerned with the effects
of a single data manipulation language statement.

In order to describe the Common SQL language, we will use a modified
version of Extended Backus-Naur Form (EBNF) notation. For a complete
description of this notation, refer to
link:D4LGIntroduction-SyntacticConventions.html[Syntactic Conventions].

Here then is the syntax for the data manipulation language statement in
Common SQL:

....
<dml statement> ::=
    <select statement> |
    <insert statement> |
    <update statement> |
    <delete statement>
....

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL-SelectStatement]]
=== Select Statement

The bulk of our discussion will center around the select statement, as
the mapping for the modification statements is relatively
straightforward.

The select statement in link:D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL.html[Common
SQL] has the following syntax:

....
<select statement> ::=
    <query expression>
    [<order by clause>]

<query expression> ::=
    <select expression> {<table operator clause>}

<select expression> ::=
    select (* | <column expression commalist>)
        <from clause>
        [<where clause>]
        [<group by clause>]
        [<having clause>]

<column expression> ::=
    <expression> [as <column alias>]

<from clause> ::=
    from <table specifier> [<join clause list>]

<where clause> ::=
    where <conditional expression>

<group by clause> ::=
    group by <expression commalist>

<having clause> ::=
    having <conditional expression>

<table specifier> ::=
    <table identifier> | "("<query expression>")" [as <table alias>]

<join clause> ::=
    [cross | inner | ((left | right) [outer])] join
     <table specifier> [on <conditional expression>]

<table operator clause> ::=
    ((union | intersect | except) [all]) <select expression>

<order by clause> ::=
    order by <order column expression commalist>

<order column expression> ::=
    <column identifier> [asc | desc]
....

The syntax is relatively straightforward, and most dialects can be
described with only slight modifications. This statement covers all the
major operations available in commercial SQL-based DBMSs today. Note
that we chose the ANSI standard version of the join clause, rather than
the <table specifier commalist> flavor common in many implementations.

[[D4LGQueryExpression]]
==== Query Expression

The <query expression> production specifies a <select expression>
followed by any number of <table operator clause> productions. We refer
to these as _union-compatible_ operators, because both operands for each
operator are required to have the same number of columns, and
assignment-compatible data types for each column, left-to-right.

[[D4LGSelectExpression]]
==== Select Expression

The <select expression> production is the bulk of the SQL syntax. This
is the familiar *select...from...where* construct. The
<column expression commalist> specifies the columns to be preserved in
the result set. The wildcard * indicates that all columns of the result
should be preserved. The <column expression> production includes an
optional as clause which indicates what the column should be named in
the final result.

[[D4LGFromClause]]
==== From Clause

The <from clause> is required and specifies the initial table from which
the result should be gathered. Note that the <table specifier> is
allowed to be a <query expression> in itself. This is known as a _nested
from_ and is only supported by some systems. We choose to support it in
link:D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL.html[Common SQL] because it is an
_extremely_ useful extension to SQL. Indeed, without it, SQL is not
relationally complete.

[[D4LGJoinClause]]
==== Join Clause

The <join clause> is optional and specifies an additional table to bring
in to the query. The various qualifiers in the join clause specify the
type of join to be done, and an optional <conditional expression> is
used to indicate how inner and outer joins are to be performed. Note
here again that the <table specifier> is allowed to be a
<query expression>, and that only a handful of systems support this type
of nesting. Even among those that do, there is inconsistency about the
types of expressions that are allowed to be nested.

[[D4LGWhereClause]]
==== Where Clause

The <where clause> is optional and specifies a filter that is applied to
the rows in the result. Only rows for which the expression specified by
<conditional expression> evaluates to true appear in the result. Values
of columns for the row being processed are accessible within the
expression by name. Note that references to column aliases are not
allowed, only columns of actual tables in the query can be referenced.
This limitation can be worked around using a nested from, which is one
of the reasons it is so useful.

[[D4LGGroupByClause]]
==== By Clause

The <group by clause> is optional, so long as the
<column expression commalist> contains no aggregate operator
invocations, or contains only aggregate operator invocations. If there
is a mixture of aggregate and non-aggregate expressions, the group by
clause must specify all the non-aggregate expressions.

[[D4LGHavingClause]]
==== Having Clause

The <having clause> is optional, and specifies a filter that is applied
to the rows in the result after any aggregation in the query. As with
the <where clause>, references to column aliases are not allowed, but
references to the aggregate operator invocations are.

[[D4LGOrderByClause]]
==== By Clause

The <order by clause> is optional, and specifies an overall ordering for
the result.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL-InsertStatement]]
=== Insert Statement

The insert statement in SQL allows a row or rows to be inserted into a
given table variable. The insert statement in
link:D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL.html[Common SQL] has the following
syntax:

....
<insert statement> ::=
    insert into <table name>"("<column name commalist>")"
        (<values clause> | <query expression>)

<values clause> ::=
    values "("<expression commalist>")"
....

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL-UpdateStatement]]
=== Update Statement

The update statement in SQL allows the data in a given table variable to
be updated. The update statement in
link:D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL.html[Common SQL] has the following
syntax:

....
<update statement> ::=
    update <table name>
        set <update column expression colmmalist>
        [<where clause>]
....

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL-DeleteStatement]]
=== Delete Statement

The delete statement in SQL allows the data in a given table variable to
be deleted. The delete statement in
link:D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL.html[Common SQL] has the following
syntax:

....
<delete statement> ::=
    delete <table name>
        [<where clause>]
....

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-VendorDialects]]
== Vendor Dialects

There are probably more dialects of SQL than there are programming
languages. Each DBMS has its own definition of what the language is,
what features it supports, how it manages data, and what the syntax of
specific statements is. This section discusses a few of the more
pervasive implementations, and how they differ from
link:D4LGComparisonWithSQL-CommonSQL.html[Common SQL], and from each
other.

Note that the differences outlined here are mainly syntactic in nature.
When the semantics of the different languages are considered as well,
the problems of finding a common language become almost unmanageable.
For this comparison we largely ignore these issues, but be aware that
the Dataphor Server is dealing with them underneath.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-VendorDialects-Transact-SQL]]
=== Transact-SQL

Microsoft SQL Server uses a dialect of SQL called Transact-SQL or T-SQL.
This dialect is very similar to Common SQL except that it supports both
flavors of join specification in the from clause, and it has no support
for the intersect and except operators. Intersect is not necessary
because it is a special case of join, but except is a critical operator,
and the lack of support for it is a serious drawback of this dialect.

A peculiarity of this dialect is the way in which outer joins are
specified when the <table specifier commalist> style of from clause is
used. The outer join is specified by using a special comparison operator
when defining the join in the where clause. The symbol *= is used for
left joins, while =* is used for right joins. There are also some
associated restrictions with using these operators, but we chose to
avoid the syntax entirely and so do not discuss them here.

Another difference is the treatment of the wildcard (*) in the
<column expression commalist>. T-SQL allows table qualifiers on the
wildcard to indicate that all the columns of a particular table are to
be included in the result. While this is a useful extension, we did not
chose to support in Common SQL, as it is not necessary.

The <from clause> in T-SQL is optional, in which case the statement is
based on the table with one row, and only the columns specified in the
<column expression commalist>. While this is also a useful extension, it
is not as general as allowing table and row selectors. As such we chose
not to support it in Common SQL.

Nested froms are allowed in T-SQL, but there is a problem with certain
constructs in which the nested expression can only reference columns in
the outer query to two levels of nesting. Incidentally, Sybase SQL also
suffers from this problem, which is not surprising, given the history of
the two systems.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-VendorDialects-OracleSQL]]
=== Oracle SQL

Oracle database systems use a dialect of SQL called Oracle SQL,
appropriately enough. This dialect differs mostly in its support for the
<from clause>. Prior to version 9i, The dialect only supports the
<table specifier commalist> flavor, and has some severe limitations on
the usage of nested from. As of 9i, the ANSI standard join specification
is supported.

This dialect also has a peculiar way of specifying outer joins it the
<table specifier commalist> is used. This is done by using the (+)
symbol next to the name of the column within the table which is to be
the outer table. While we did not find the same restrictions on usage as
T-SQL has, we find the syntax clumsy and counter-intuitive.

Nested froms are allowed in Oracle SQL, but the nested expression may
not reference columns in the main query. This is in violation of Core
SQL as specified by the ANSI-SQL 1999 standard, and is a major drawback
of this dialect.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-VendorDialects-DB2SQL]]
=== DB2 SQL

DB2 database systems use a dialect of SQL which we will call DB2 SQL.
This dialect is very similar to Common SQL, and does not require much
modification to represent. It is worth noting that the dialect does
suffer from a nested from anomaly as well.

Nested froms are allowed in DB2 SQL, but the nested expression may not
reference columns in the main query unless the keyword *TABLE* is
specified as part of the nested from definition. This seems to be a
general solution to the problem, and so it is little more than a
peculiarity.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4]]
== Mapping an SQL Query
Into D4Mapping an SQL Query Into D4

In order to show how an arbitrary SQL statement can be expressed in D4,
it is useful to have a sample database definition to work with. The
sample is given in D4, but the syntax is similar to SQL and the
semantics should be clear:

....
create table Employee
{
    ID : Integer,
    Name : String,
    key { ID }
};

insert
    table
    {
        row { 1 ID, "Joe" Name },
        row { 2, "John" },
        row { 3, "Josh" },
        row { 4, "Jeff" },
        row { 5, "Jake" },
        row { 6, "Jeff" }
    }
    into Employee;

create table Manager
{
    Employee_ID : Integer,
    Manager_ID : Integer,
    key { Employee_ID },
    reference Manager_Employee { Employee_ID } references Employee { ID },
    reference Manager_Manager { Manager_ID } references Employee { ID }
};

insert
    table
    {
        row { 2 Employee_ID, 1 Manager_ID },
        row { 3 Employee_ID, 1 Manager_ID },
        row { 4 Employee_ID, 2 Manager_ID },
        row { 6 Employee_ID, 2 Manager_ID },
        row { 5 Employee_ID, 4 Manager_ID }
    }
    into Manager;

create table Department
{
    ID : Integer,
    Description : String,
    key { ID }
};

insert
    table
    {
        row { 1 ID, 'Development' Description },
        row { 2 ID, 'Support' Description },
        row { 3 ID, 'Testing' Description }
    }
    into Department;

create table EmployeeDepartment
{
    Employee_ID : Integer,
    Department_ID : Integer,
    key { Employee_ID },
    reference EmployeeDepartment_Employee { Employee_ID } references Employee { ID },
    reference EmployeeDepartment_Department { Department_ID } references Department { ID }
};

insert
    table
    {
        row { 1 Employee_ID, 1 Department_ID },
        row { 2 Employee_ID, 1 Department_ID },
        row { 3 Employee_ID, 2 Department_ID },
        row { 4 Employee_ID, 2 Department_ID },
        row { 5 Employee_ID, 3 Department_ID }
    }
    into EmployeeDepartment;

create table EmployeePhone
{
    Employee_ID : Integer,
    Phone : String,
    key { ID, Phone },
    reference EmployeePhone_Employee { Employee_ID } references Employee { ID }
};

EmployeePhone :=
    table
    {
        row { 1 Employee_ID, "555-1234" Phone },
        row { 1 Employee_ID, "555-1000" Phone },
        row { 2 Employee_ID, "555-4321" Phone },
        row { 4 Employee_ID, "555-4444" Phone },
        row { 5 Employee_ID, "555-5678" Phone }
    };
....

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-DataRetrieval]]
=== Data Retrieval

We begin by mapping basic data retrieval. Suppose we are asked 'Get IDs
and Names of all employees.' This simple query can be answered using the
SQL statement:

....
select * from Employee
....

This is the simplest select statement possible in Common SQL and
indicates that all the columns and all the rows of the Employee table
should be included in the result. Notice that we have not done any
manipulation to the result, in other words, no operators have been
invoked. We have simply referenced the name of a table variable within
an expression.

If this is true, why the '* **from**' portion of the query? Clearly it
is an artifact of the rigid structure required of SQL statements. By
contrast, the equivalent D4 statement:

....
select Employee;
....

This is the simplest select statement possible in D4 and is precisely
what we wanted, all the columns and all the rows of the Employee table,
without any extra artifacts. The point is, because we invoked no
operators, no extra information needs to be specified, the reference to
the table variable is enough. While this may not seem like much right
now, keep in mind this is the simplest select statement possible. As the
statements become more complex, these differences will become more and
more apparent.

Also note that unlike SQL, the keyword
*link:D4LGDataManipulation-SelectStatement.html[select]* in D4 is only
part of the statement, it is not part of the expression.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-TheWhereClause]]
=== The Where Clause

Next, we consider a simple restriction. Suppose we are asked 'Get the
IDs and Names of Employees whose ID is greater than 3.' In SQL, we have:

....
select * from Employee where ID > 3;
....

The <where clause> applies a filter to the result. Only rows for which
the specified conditional expression evaluates to true are included in
the result. In D4, the equivalent query is:

....
select Employee where ID > 3;
....

The <<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Where, where>> operator in D4
performs the same type of filtering on the result.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-UnravelingtheColumnList]]
=== Unraveling the Column List

The column list in an SQL query is actually performing four distinct
operations in the query: projection, extension, renaming, and part of
aggregation. In this section, we consider the first of these,
projection. Suppose we are asked 'Get the Names of Employees.' In SQL we
would write:

....
select distinct Name from Employee
....

The projection step indicates that only the Name column from the
Employee table should appear in the result.

The equivalent statement in D4 is:

....
select Employee over { Name };
....

Projection in D4 is always done using one of two operators,
<<link:D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-OverandRemove, over>> and
<<link:D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-OverandRemove, remove>>. Over allows
the desired columns to be specified, while remove allows the unwanted
columns to be specified. Thus an alternative formulation of the query
is:

....
select Employee remove { ID };
....

There is another important difference between the SQL version of
projection, and the projection of D4: the elimination of duplicates. In
the SQL version of the query, we had to specify *distinct* in order to
tell the system that duplicates should be eliminated from the result. In
D4, the result is never allowed to contain duplicates, so no *distinct*
keyword is required.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-AddingColumns]]
=== Adding Columns

Next we consider the effect of columns defined in terms of expressions.
Suppose we are asked 'Get IDs, and Names of all employees, together with
the length of the name for each employee.' In SQL, we would write:

....
select ID, Name, Length(Name) from Employee
....

This query illustrates the second of the four tasks specified in the
link:D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-UnravelingtheColumnList.html[column
list], that of extension. In SQL, an expression is allowed to define the
value for a given column in the result.

The equivalent statement in D4 is:

....
select Employee add { Length(Name) NameLength };
....

The <<link:D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Add, add>> operator of D4 allows
columns to be added to the result. The values for the new columns are
given by the expressions in the add clause.

An important point can be illustrated by asking a simple question about
the result of the SQL version of the query: What is the name of the
column containing the length of the name of each employee? The answer
is, it is undefined. The SQL syntax does not force the column to be
named, and without a name, it cannot be referenced by anything else in
the query. This fact has severe implications when we attempt to use
queries of this type in more complex expressions of SQL. By contrast, in
the D4 version, the name is specified as part of the definition of the
column, so the problem is completely avoided.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-RenamingColumns]]
=== Renaming Columns

Next we discuss the renaming of columns in a result. Suppose we want the
Name column in the result to be called LastName. In SQL we write:

....
select ID, Name as LastName from Employee
....

This query illustrates the third of the four tasks being specified by
the link:D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-UnravelingtheColumnList.html[column
list], that of renaming columns. The optional *as* keyword is used to
specify a new name for the given column.

In D4, the equivalent query is:

....
select Employee rename { Name LastName };
....

The <<link:D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Rename, rename>> operator of D4
allows the names of the columns in a result to be changed. This operator
has no effect on the values of the columns in the result.

To illustrate a point about the names of columns in the result, consider
the following SQL query:

....
select ID, Name, Name from Employee
....

This query is perfectly legal in SQL, but the result has the same name
for two columns. Again, we are faced with the problem that the column
cannot be referenced by anything else in the query. In D4, all the
columns of a given result must be unique, so again, the problem is
completely avoided.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-TheGroupByandHavingClauses]]
=== The Group By and Having Clauses

Now we consider queries in which columns in the result are defined with
aggregate expressions. Suppose we are asked 'Get the number of
employees.' In SQL we write:

....
select Count(*) from Employee
....

This invokes the aggregate operator Count(*) on the Employee table.

In D4, the equivalent query is:

....
select Employee group add { Count() EmployeeCount };
....

On the surface the SQL version of the query looks very similar to the
extend operator, but in reality, the task is completely different, and
is the fourth task specified in the
link:D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-UnravelingtheColumnList.html[column
list], that of <<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Aggregate, aggregation>>.
Actually, the task is split between the expressions in the column list,
and the group by clause, a fact which serves to complicate matters even
further.

By changing the query slightly to 'Get the names of employees together
with the number of employees that have that name' we get the new
statement:

....
select Name, Count(*)
    from Employee
    group by Name
....

In D4, the equivalent query is:

....
select Employee
    group by { Name } add { Count() EmployeeCount };
....

In the SQL version of the query, because the column list includes both
aggregate and non-aggregate expressions, we are forced to use the group
by clause to express the desired grouping. In SQL, the task of
specifying an aggregation is split between the select list where the
columns to be computed are specified, and the group by clause, where the
grouping columns are specified. In D4, the group operator allows the
grouping columns to be specified directly. This is followed immediately
by the specification of the aggregates to compute.

Note that the group by in SQL is not allowed to reference aliases. With
that in mind, consider the following two equivalent SQL queries:

....
select ID / 2, Count(*)
    from Employee
    group by ID / 2
....

....
select ID / 2, Count(*)
    from Employee
    group by ID * 0.5
....

Clearly, these two queries are equivalent, but one is a legal SQL query,
and the other is not. Because the group by clause must contain at least
the non-aggregate columns in the select list, we are forced to write out
the expression multiple times, and we cannot use what are clearly
equivalent formulations of the expression. In D4, this query becomes:

....
select Employee
    add { ID / 2 HalfID }
    group by { HalfID } add { Count() EmployeeCount };
....

Note that the actual task of computing the expression to be grouped on
is relegated to the <<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Add, add>> operator,
rather than intermixed with the
<<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Aggregate, group>> operator. By cleanly
separating the tasks involved, the complexity of the language is
reduced, while the power is increased.

To pursue this example further, suppose we only want rows in the result
for which the EmployeeCount is greater than one. In SQL, the query
becomes:

....
select ID / 2, Count(*)
    from Employee
    group by ID / 2
    having Count(*) > 1
....

The addition of the having clause allows us to filter the result based
on the values computed for aggregate expressions in the select list.
Again, column aliases cannot be referenced, so we are forced to write
out the same aggregate expression (with the same restrictions on usage,
namely it must be syntactically the same expression, not semantically)
in order to express the desired filter. In D4, the equivalent query is:

....
select Employee
    add { ID / 2 HalfID }
    group by { HalfID } add { Count() EmployeeCount }
    where EmployeeCount > 1;
....

There is no need to introduce a new concept for filtering, we already
have that functionality in the
<<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Where, where>> operator. Because D4 is an
algebra, the result of any operator can be used as an argument to the
next operator. This allows us to simply add another where referencing
the EmployeeCount column.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-TheFromandJoinClauses]]
=== The From and Join Clauses

With the column list completely unraveled, we now turn our attention to
the from clause. Up till now, we have been using a very simple from
clause in all our queries: *from* Employee. In SQL, the from clause is
allowed to contain any number of references to tables together with the
specification of how those tables should be brought together in the
result. Suppose we are asked 'Get IDs, Names and Phone Numbers of all
Employees.' The information to satisfy this query is in two different
tables, Employee and EmployeePhone. In SQL, we use a join and write:

....
select *
    from Employee
        join EmployeePhone on ID = Employee_ID
....

This query references the Employee table, then joins it to the
EmployeePhone table using the relationship ID = Employee_ID. This type
of join is also called an inner join, and the keyword *inner* may even
be specified in the join clause. We can further categorize this type of
join as an equi-join, meaning that the condition specified to perform
the join consists only of equality comparisons between columns in
opposite tables of the join, and that all such comparisons are required
to be true in order for a match to appear in the result (in other words,
only the *and* operator is used between column equality comparisons).

In D4, the equivalent query is:

....
select Employee
    join EmployeePhone by ID = Employee_ID;
....

Note again the disappearance of the '* **from**' portion of the query.
Because no projection is being performed, it is simply not specified.
Note also that in D4 there is no *inner* keyword.

To illustrate the next kind of
<<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Join, join>>, suppose we are asked 'Get all
possible combinations of two employees.' In SQL we write:

....
select *
    from Employee
        cross join Employee
....

This is known as the cross-product, or
<<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Times, times>> operator, and specifies
that for each row in the left table and each row in the right table a
row should appear in the result that is the concatenation of both rows.
Note that we now have two of each column in the result, and are faced
with another naming problem. In order to solve this problem in SQL, we
can make use of the concept of __table aliases__. By rewriting the query
as:

....
select *
    from Employee E1
        cross join Employee E2
....

we can now uniquely reference all the columns in the result.

In D4, the first query would be:

....
select Employee times Employee;
....

but this would fail with a compile-time error stating that duplicate
names exist in the result. In order to express the query, we can make
use of the rename operator:

....
select (Employee rename { ID E1.ID, Name E1.Name })
    times (Employee rename { ID E2.ID, Name E2.Name });
....

Clearly this involves an excessive amount of renaming, so D4 introduces
a variant of the <<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Rename, rename>>
operator that works for all the columns in a table. Using this operator
we can rewrite the query as:

....
select (Employee rename E1) times (Employee rename E2);
....

and obtain an equivalent result.

The next kind of join possible in the join clause is called an
<<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-OuterJoin, outer join>>. There are three
different flavors of outer join in SQL: left, right, and full. Suppose
we are asked 'Get IDs and Names of all employees together with the
PhoneNumbers of those employees, if they have one.' In SQL we write:

....
select *
    from Employee
        left join EmloyeePhone on ID = Employee_ID
....

This query indicates that a join should be performed between Employee
and EmployeePhone, but that if a given Employee row has no match, it
should be included in the result with nulls for the columns of
EmployeePhone.

In D4, the equivalent query is:

....
select Employee left join EmployeePhone by ID = Employee_ID;
....

The right join simply specifies the right table as the one that should
have unmatched rows included, and a full join states that both sides
should have unmatched rows included. D4 supports the right join, with
the <<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-OuterJoin, right join>> operator, but
does not support the full join operator, as it is rarely used, and is
only shorthand for the union of the left and right joins.

An important difference between the join operators of SQL and D4 is that
in D4, all joins are required to be
<<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Join-NaturalJoins, equi-joins>>. To see why
this is so, we must first show that any join can be expressed using a
combination of cross-product and restrict:

....
select Employee join EmployeePhone by ID = Employee_ID
....

is logically equivalent to:

....
select Employee cross join EmployeePhone where ID = Employee_ID
....

This means that any non-equi join such as:

....
select Employee join EmployeePhone by ID > Employee_ID
....

can always be expressed using the equivalent cross-product and
restriction, so we do not lose any expressive power by restricting joins
to be equi-joins. However, we do gain the benefit that the cardinality
of any join is always well-defined, which has implications for the key
inference mechanism of D4. For this reason, all joins in D4 are required
to be equi-joins.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-TheTableOperatorClause]]
=== The Table Operator Clause

Union CompatibleNow that we have described the <select expression>, we
discuss the <table operator clause>, which allows complete select
expressions to be used as arguments to the
_link:D4LGQueryExpression.html[union-compatible]_ binary table
operators: union, intersection and difference. Two tables in SQL are
union-compatible if they have the same number of columns, and the
columns have assignment-compatible data types, from left to right (i.e.
the first column in the left table is the same type as the first column
in the right table, and so on).

First, we consider the union operator. Suppose we are asked 'Get the IDs
of all employees that have phones or that have managers.' In SQL we
write:

....
select ID
    from Employee
        join EmployeePhone by ID = Employee_ID
union
select ID
    from Employee
        join Manager by ID = Employee_ID
....

This query uses the union operator to combine the ID column from each
portion of the query into a single result. A row will appear in the
result of a union if it appears in the left table or the right table, or
both.

The equivalent query in D4 is:

....
select
    (Employee join EmployeePhone by ID = Employee_ID)
    union
    (Employee join Manager by ID = Employee_ID);
....

There is an important difference between the two operators. In SQL, the
union clause is allowed to include an optional *all* which indicates
that duplicates should not be eliminated from the result. If a given row
appears in both the left and right sides of the union, it will appear
twice in the result. In D4, duplicates are never allowed, so no such
option is available for the <<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Union, union>>
operator.

Next, we consider the intersect operator. If we change our query to 'Get
the IDs of all employees that have phones and that have managers' then
the SQL becomes:

....
select ID
    from Employee
        join EmployeePhone by ID = Employee_ID
intersect
select ID
    from Employee
        join Manager by ID = Employee_ID
....

This query uses the *intersect* operator to compute the desired result.
A row will appear in the result of an intersect if it appears in the
left table and the right table.

The equivalent query in D4 is:

....
select
    (Employee join EmployeePhone by ID = Employee_ID)
    intersect
    (Employee join Manager by ID = Employee_ID);
....

Again, note that the SQL version of the operator includes an optional
*all* which specifies that duplicates should not be eliminated from the
result. D4 has no such option for the
<<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Intersect, intersect>> operator.

Finally, the difference operator. If we change our query to 'Get the IDs
of all employees that have phones and do not have managers' then the SQL
becomes:

....
select ID
    from Employee
        join EmployeePhone by ID = Employee_ID
except
select ID
    from Employee
        join Manager by ID = Employee_ID
....

This query uses the difference operator to remove the ID for any
employee that has a manager from the result. A row will only appear in
the result of a difference if it appears in the left table and not the
right table.

The equivalent query in D4 is:

....
select
    (Employee join EmployeePhone by ID = Employee_ID)
    minus
    (Employee join Manager by ID = Employee_ID);
....

Once again, the SQL version of the operator includes the *all* keyword
which specifies that duplicate elimination should not occur. D4 has no
counterpart for this version of the difference operator,
<<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Minus, minus>>.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-TheOrderByClause]]
=== The Order By Clause

The order by clause in D4 maps in a fairly straightforward way into D4.
For example, suppose we are asked 'Get the IDs and Names of all
Employees ordered by Name alphabetically. In SQL we write:

....
select ID, Name
    from Employee
    order by Name
....

The equivalent statement in D4 is:

....
select Employee order by { Name };
....

In both languages, the order by is not part of the expression, rather it
is part of the specification of how the result should be returned. In
other words, the link:D4LGOrders.html[order] by clause in D4 is not an
operator, it is part of the select statement.

[[D4LGComparisonWithSQL-MappinganSQLQueryIntoD4-DataModificationStatements]]
=== Data Modification Statements

The syntax for the
link:D4LGDataManipulation-InsertStatement.html[insert],
link:D4LGDataManipulation-UpdateStatement.html[update], and
link:D4LGDataManipulation-DeleteStatement.html[delete] statements in SQL
and D4 is very similar, even identical in some respects, so the mapping
is relatively straightforward. There are some important logical
differences between the semantics of the operators, particularly for the
insert and update.

First, we discuss the
link:D4LGDataManipulation-InsertStatement.html[insert] statement.
Suppose we want to add a new employee into the list of Employees. In
SQL, we have:

....
insert into Employee(ID, Name) values(7, "Jake")
....

This example illustrates the use of the first variation of the insert
statement in SQL, that of inserting a single row. Suppose we want to
insert the results of some query. In SQL, we have:

....
insert into Employee(ID, Name) select ID + 6, Name from Employee
....

In D4, the equivalent statements are:

....
insert table { row { 7 ID, "Jake" Name } } into Employee;
....

and

....
insert Employee redefine { ID := ID + 6 } into Employee;
....

Note: the <<D4TableOperators.adoc#D4LGTableExpressions-Redefine, redefine>> operator
is shorthand for an equivalent *add-rename-remove* operation.

Several important points should be made about the above statements:

* Left-to-right ordering
+
In the SQL versions of the statements, the left-to-right order of the
<values clause> in the single row insert, and the <query expression> in
the multiple row insert is important. By contrast, D4 attaches no
significance to the order of the columns in the statement. For example:
+
....
insert table { row { "Jake" Name, 7 ID } } into Employee
....
+
has the same effect because the columns are matched by name, not by
position in the result.
* Order of specification
+
In Common SQL, the insert target is specified first. In english, the
insert statement could be rendered 'insert into this table, that data.'
In D4, the data to be inserted is specified first, rendering the english
equivalent as 'insert this data into that table.'
* Restrictions on target
+
In Common SQL, the insert target must be a table variable name. In D4,
the insert target is allowed to be an arbitrary table-valued expression,
i.e. the expression could consist of joins, projections, restrictions,
etc.,.

Next, we discuss the
link:D4LGDataManipulation-UpdateStatement.html[update] statement.
Suppose we discover that the employee with ID 6 is really named 'John'.
In SQL, we would write:

....
update Employee set Name = 'John' where ID = 6
....

The equivalent statement in D4 is:

....
update Employee set { Name := 'John' } where ID = 6;
....

While the two statements are very similar in structure, there are some
important differences:

* Assignment operator
+
The D4 version of the statement uses the assignment operator
link:D4LGImperativeStatements-Variables-AssignmentStatement.html[:=] to
indicate that this is indeed an assignment statement. The current value
of the variable is being replaced by a new value.
* Restrictions on target
+
As with the insert statement, the D4 update statement allows the target
to be an arbitrary table-valued expression, rather than requiring it to
be the name of a table variable as in SQL.

Finally, the link:O-System.Delete.html[delete] statement. Suppose we
decide to remove the employee with ID 7 from the list of employees. In
SQL, we have:

....
delete Employee where ID = 7
....

The equivalent statement in D4 is:

....
delete Employee where ID = 7;
....

The important difference between the two statements lies in the
specification of the target. As with the other modification operators in
D4, the delete statement is allowed to target an arbitrary table-valued
expression. In fact, the where clause is not part of the syntax of the
delete statement in D4, rather it is part of the table expression to be
deleted.
