= Data Manipulation
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book
:toc:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[D4LGDataManipulation]]
== Summary

This section covers the data manipulation language statements available
in the D4 language. These statements allow data in the database to be
retrieved, stored, and changed.

Data manipulation statements in D4 have the following syntax:

....
<dml statement> ::=
    <select statement> |
    <insert statement> |
    <update statement> |
    <delete statement>
....

It is important to note that these statements are set-at-a-time
operations, meaning that they do not operate at a row level, rather on
an entire table variable at once. Also note that conceptually each of
the modification statements, **insert**, **update**, and **delete**, are
shorthands for some equivalent relational assignment.

The following sections consider each statement in detail.

[[D4LGDataManipulation-SelectStatement]]
== Select Statement

The select statement allows for the retrieval of a specified table
expression. The statement allows the result set to be ordered
arbitrarily, and allows for the specification of
link:DDGP1Cursor.html[cursor] level properties such as isolation level
and cursor type. The select statement and the cursor selector both use
the same <cursor definition> production rule to define their syntax.

The purpose of the select statement in the D4 language is to provide a
facility for parser-level recognition of statements that should return a
result set. This is used by the Call-Level Interface (CLI) to determine
whether a given batch should be executed or opened. Thus, a select
statement should only be used to retrieve data through the CLI. For
example:

....
Employee;
....

is a valid expression, but no data will be retrieved. On the other hand
the results of the following query will be retrieved through the CLI:

....
select Employee;
....

....
ID Name
-- ----
1  Joe
2  John
3  Josh
4  Jeff
5  Jake
6  Jeff
....

The select statement in D4 has the following syntax:

....
<select statement> ::=
    select <cursor definition>

<cursor definition> ::=
    <expression>
    [<order clause> | <browse clause>]
    [<cursor capabilities>]
    [<cursor isolation>]
    [<cursor type>]

<order clause> ::=
    order by
        "{"<order column definition commalist>"}"
        [<language modifiers>]

<browse clause> ::=
    browse by
        "{"<order column definition commalist>"}"
        [<language modifiers>]

<order column definition> ::=
    <column name> [sort <expression>] [asc | desc] [(include | exclude) nil]

<column name> ::=
    <qualified identifier>

<cursor capabilities> ::=
    capabilities "{"<cursor capability commalist>"}"

<cursor capability> ::=
    navigable |
    backwardsnavigable |
    bookmarkable |
    searchable |
    updateable |
    truncateable |
    countable

<cursor isolation> ::=
    isolation (none | browse | isolated)

<cursor type> ::=
    type (static | dynamic)
....

The basis of the cursor definition is a table expression specified by
<expression>. For a detailed description of the <expression> production
rule, refer to link:D4LGLanguageElements-Expressions.html[Expressions].
For a complete description of the table operators avaialable in D4,
refer to link:D4LGTableExpressions.html[Table Operators].

[[D4LGDataManipulation-SelectStatement-OrderingTheResultSet]]
=== Ordering the Result Set

The result set for a link:DDGP1Cursor.html[cursor] is ordered as
specified by the <order clause> or <browse clause>. An _order_
specification simply indicates the requested order for the result set,
whereas a _browse_ specification indicates not only the requested order,
but that _navigational access_ should be used to retrieve data from the
cursor. A cursor using navigational access enables functionality such as
searching and backwards scrolling by transparently transforming the
expression actually used to retrieve the data. This type of access
enables efficient searching and navigation through a cursor without
requiring ad-hoc solutions to be developed in client applications.

An order can consist of any subset of the columns of a table variable in
any order. Each column can include an optional sort expression, and an
optional ascending indicator. In addition, each column can indicate
whether or not rows with nil for the column should be included in the
result set. By default, rows with nils are excluded.

The sort expression allows the order to use an arbitrary condition for
sorting. The sort expression must be integer-valued, functional and
deterministic. The expression has access to the implicit variables
*left.value* and **right.value**, which are the values to be compared.
The expression must return -1 if *left.value* is less than
**right.value**, 0 if the two values are equal, and 1 if *left.value* is
greater than **right.value**.

The optional ascending indicator specifies whether this column should be
sorted ascending or descending. If no ascending indicator is specified,
ascending is assumed.

The following example illustrates the use of the order clause:

....
select Employee order by { Name, ID desc };
....

....
ID Name
-- ----
5  Jake
6  Jeff
4  Jeff
1  Joe
2  John
3  Josh
....

[[D4LGDataManipulation-SelectStatement-CursorCapabilities]]
=== Cursor Capabilities

link:DDGP1Cursor.html[Cursor] capabilities describe the behaviors
available for the cursor. These include items such as updatability,
backwards navigation, searching, and bookmarking. The D4 language
defines the following cursor capabilities:

* Navigable
+
Indicates that the cursor is capable of forward navigation through calls
like Next and Last. Also indicates that the cursor supports data
retrieval through the Select call. All cursors are guaranteed to support
this level of functionality.
* Backwards Navigable
+
Indicates that the cursor is capable of backward navigation through
calls like Prior and First.
* Bookmarkable
+
Indicates that the cursor is capable of bookmarking functionality, or
remembering a location in the result set for quick location at a later
time.
* Searchable
+
Indicates that the cursor is capable of performing searches through
calls like FindKey and FindNearest. Note that the search must be made
against the same columns that were used to order the result.
* Updatable
+
Indicates that the cursor supports updates through calls like Insert and
Update.
* Truncatable
+
Indicates that the cursor supports truncation.
* Countable
+
Indicates that the cursor supports retrieving a count of the number of
rows in the result.

The cursor definition allows any combination of these capabilities to be
requested. The Dataphor Server will attempt to provide a cursor with the
requested capabilities. An error occurs if the requested capabilities
cannot be provided. If no cursor capabilities are specified as part of
the cursor definition, the default capabilities of Navigable will be
requested. All cursors are guaranteed to support at least the Navigable
capability.

The following sections consider each cursor capability in detail. The
functionality described in each section is available either as operators
in the D4 language, or through the CLI directly.

[[DDGP2Navigable]]
==== Navigable

Navigable indicates that the cursor supports basic navigational access.
All cursors support this level of functionality.

The following functionality is available for cursors supporting the
Navigable category of behavior:

[width="100%",cols="100%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Operator |Description
|Select |Retrieves the current row of the cursor. It is an error if
either BOF or EOF is true.

|Next |Advances the current position of the cursor by 1 row. If this
moves past the last row in the result set, EOF will be true.

|Last |Moves the current position of the cursor past the last row in the
result set. EOF will always be true after a call to Last

|BOF |Returns true if the current position of the cursor is before the
first row in the result set. BOF will always be true when the cursor is
first opened.

|EOF |Returns true if the current position of the cursor is after the
last row in the result set. EOF will only be true after the cursor is
first opened if the cursor is empty.

|IsEmpty |Returns true if there are no rows in the result set. This is
equivalent to evaluating the expression BOF *and* EOF. This
functionality is not exposed in D4.

|Reset |Resets the cursor by requerying for the result set. This is
equivalent to closing and re-opening the cursor.
|=======================================================================

[[DDGP2BackwardsNavigable]]
==== Backwards Navigable

Backwards Navigable indicates that the cursor supports backwards
navigation.

The following functionality is included in the Backwards Navigable
category of behavior:

[width="100%",cols="100%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Operator |Description
|Prior |Moves the current position of the cursor to the prior row. If
this moves before the first row in the result set, BOF will be true.

|First |Moves the current position of the cursor before the first row in
the result set. BOF will always be true after a call to First.
|=======================================================================

[[DDGP2Bookmarkable]]
==== Bookmarkable

Bookmarkable indicates that the cursor supports navigation and location
through the use of bookmarks. A bookmark is a system provided value
which is like a handle to a specific position in the cursor. If a cursor
supports bookmarks, this functionality can be used to remember certain
locations within a cursor and return to them later. A bookmark is only
valid for the cursor from which it was requested. All bookmarks are
invalidated when the cursor closes. All bookmarks requested through the
GetBookmark operator must be disposed using the DisposeBookmark call.

Note that within D4, there is no reason to use the Bookmarkable cursor
capability. It is exposed as an implementation mechanism for data access
layer clients. If you request a Bookmarkable cursor within D4, it will
be supported by the Searchable cursor capability described in the next
section. For this reason, cursors declared within D4 should simply use
the Searchable capability.

[width="100%",cols="100%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Operator |Description
|GetBookmark |Retrieves a bookmark for the current position of the
cursor which can be used in subsequent calls to other Bookmarkable
methods for the same cursor. A bookmark obtained with GetBookmark must
be released with a call to one of the DisposeBookmark methods.

|GotoBookmark |Moves the current position of the cursor to the row
identified by the given bookmark. The bookmark must have been obtained
from a previous call to GetBookmark for this cursor.

|CompareBookmarks |Compares two bookmarks and returns an integer value
indicating the relative order of the bookmarks. If the first bookmark is
less than the second, a -1 is returned. If the first bookmark is equal
to the second, a 0 is returned. Otherwise, a 1 is returned. Both
bookmarks must have been obtained from previous calls to GetBookmark for
this cursor.

|DisposeBookmark |Releases the given bookmark. The bookmark must have
been obtained from a previous call to GetBookmark for this cursor. This
functionality is not exposed in D4.

|DisposeBookmarks |Releases each of the given bookmarks. All the
bookmarks must have been obtained from previous calls to GetBookmark for
this cursor. This functionality is not exposed in D4.
|=======================================================================

[[DDGP2Searchable]]
==== Searchable

Searchable indicates that the cursor supports searching based on the
order of the rows within the result set. Searching must be done on a
subset (not necessarily proper) of the columns that were used to order
the result set.

The following functionality is included in the Searchable category of
behavior:

[width="100%",cols="100%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Operator |Description
|Order |Describes the order of the rows in the result set. This
functionality is not exposed in D4.

|GetKey |Returns a row value with a column for each column in the order
of the result set, with the values set to the values of the current row
of the cursor. It is an error to request a key if either BOF or EOF is
true.

|FindKey |Attempts to position the cursor on the row matching the values
in the given row value. Returns true if a matching row was found, and
false otherwise.

|FindNearest |Positions the cursor on the row most closely matching the
values in the given row value.

|Refresh |Refreshes the cursor by requerying for the underlying result
set. If a row is given, attempts to position the cursor on that row,
otherwise, attempts to maintain the current position of the cursor in
the result set.
|=======================================================================

[[DDGP2Updatable]]
==== Updatable

Updatable indicates that the cursor is not readonly, i.e. data can be
updated through the cursor. Whether or not the updates are visible
through the cursor, and the position of the cursor after the updates are
performed, is determined by the Cursor Type behavior.

The following functionality is included in the Updateable category of
behavior:

[width="100%",cols="100%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Operator |Description
|Insert |Inserts the given row into the database through the cursor.
This has the same effect as attempting to insert the row into a view
defined by the expression used to generate the result set for the
cursor.

|Update |Updates the columns in the current row of the cursor to the
values in the given row through the cursor. This has the same effect as
attempting to update a view defined by the expression used to generate
the result set for the cursor and restricted to the current row in the
cursor.

|Delete |Deletes the current row of the cursor. This has the same effect
as attempting to delete the row from a view defined by the expression
used to generate the result set for the cursor and restricted to the
current row in the cursor.

|Default |Requests the default values for columns in the result set for
the cursor.

|Change |Requests the effect of the given change to the columns of the
current row of the result set for the cursor.

|Validate |Validates the values in columns of the given row based on the
columns of the result set for the cursor.
|=======================================================================

[[DDGP2Truncatable]]
==== Truncatable

Truncatable indicates that the result set may be completely deleted with
a single call.

The following functionality is included in the Truncateable category of
behavior:

[width="100%",cols="100%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Operator |Description
|Truncate |Deletes all the rows in the cursor. This functionality is not
exposed in D4.
|=======================================================================

[[DDGP2Countable]]
==== Countable

Countable indicates that the cursor supports counting of the rows in the
result set. Note that the result of counting the rows in the result set
depends on the type of the cursor. Repeated invocations may not return
the same result.

The following functionality included in the Countable category of
behavior:

[width="100%",cols="100%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Operator |Description
|RowCount |Returns the number of rows in the result set. The results of
this call are not guaranteed to be an accurate reflection of the current
state of the database. If an accurate count is desired, use an aggregate
query. This functionality is not exposed in D4.
|=======================================================================

[[D4LGDataManipulation-SelectStatement-CursorIsolation]]
=== Cursor Isolation

The isolation of a link:DDGP1Cursor.html[cursor] determines how the
cursor runs with respect to other active transactions in the system. The
settings for this behavior correspond roughly to the isolation levels
available for transaction processing.

If no isolation level is specified as part of the cursor definition, the
default cursor isolation level of None will be used.

[width="100%",cols="100%",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Method |Description
|None |Indicates that the cursor runs at the isolation level of the
current transaction.

|Browse |Indicates that the cursor should use optimistic concurrency
control.

|Isolated |Indicates that the cursor should use pessimistic concurrency
control.
|=======================================================================

[[D4LGDataManipulation-SelectStatement-CursorType]]
=== Cursor Type

The type of a link:DDGP1Cursor.html[cursor] determines how the cursor is
materialized and how it behaves with respect to updates being made
through the cursor, and by other users of the system. Cursors may be
requested either static or dynamic.

If no cursor type is specified as part of the cursor definition, the
default cursor type of Dynamic will be used.

[[D4LGStatic]]
==== Static

Indicates that the cursor is insensitive to updates made to the result
set after the cursor has been opened.

In a static cursor, updates made to rows in the result set, either by
the user of the cursor, or updates that become visible based on the
isolation level of the cursor from other transactions, are not visible.
The result set is fully materialized on open, and no changes are made to
this set. Note that calls like Reset and Refresh will necessarily
require the data from the underlying database, and the result set will
be refreshed at that point.

[[D4LGDynamic]]
==== Dynamic

Indicates that the cursor is sensitive to updates made to rows in the
result set after the cursor has been opened.

In a dynamic cursor, updates made to rows in the result set, either by
the user of the cursor, or from other transactions that become visible
based on the isolation level of the cursor, are visible through the
cursor. The result set is dynamically queried for as it is requested.
Note that this is not a guarantee that updates made by other
transactions will be visible, only that the system is not required to
exclude them. Depending on how the query is processed, and how the
devices performing the processing manipulate the rows in the result set,
external updates may or may not be visible. However, a dynamic cursor
does guarantee that updates made through the cursor are visible.

[[D4LGDataManipulation-InsertStatement]]
== Insert Statement

The insert statement allows data to be inserted into a given table
variable or expression.

The insert statement in D4 has the following syntax:

....
<insert statement> ::=
    insert [<language modifiers>] <source> into <target>

<source> ::=
    <expression>

<target> ::=
    <expression>
....

The insert must not violate any constraint of the database.

The value specified by <source> must be assignment-compatible with the
variable or expression given by <target>, with the exception that the
source value need not include all the columns of the target value.
Columns not specified in the insert are provided a default value if the
corresponding column, or the scalar type of the column, of the target
has a default specification.

The expression given by <source> must be table-valued. In other words,
the expression must return a table. In order to insert a single row, a
table selector must be used to construct a table value.

The variable or expression given by <target> need not be a table
variable. The target can be a table expression of arbitrary complexity.
In this case, the updatability mechanism for views is used to perform
the insert. For more information on how modifications are made to views,
refer to the documentation for each table operator in this guide.

Note that the insert statement is essentially shorthand for an
equivalent table variable assignment. For example:

....
insert A into B;
....

and

....
B := B union A;
....

are conceptually equivalent, with the exception that a duplicate row
that would be rejected by the insert statement would not necessarily be
rejected by the assignment statement. For example, if a given row to be
inserted is already present in the target, the assignment statement will
effectively ignore the insertion, whereas the insert statement will fail
with a duplicate key violation.

The following example illustrates the use of the D4 insert statement:

....
insert
    table
    {
        row { "John Smith" Name }
    }
    into Customer;
....

[[D4LGDataManipulation-UpdateStatement]]
== Update Statement

The update statement allows the data in a given table variable or
expression to be changed. The update statement will also work against
row variables.

The update statement in D4 has the following syntax:

....
<update statement> ::=
    update [<language modifiers>] <expression>
        set "{"<ne update column commalist>"}"
        [where <expression term>]

<update column> ::=
    <target> := <expression term>

<target> ::=
    <expression>
....

The update must not violate any constraint of the database.

The variable or expression given by
link:D4LGLanguageElements-Expressions.html[<expression>] need not be a
table variable. The target can be a table expression of arbitrary
complexity. In this case, the updatability mechanism for views is used
to perform the update. For more information on how modifications are
made to views, refer to the documentation for each table operator in
this guide.

The update target may also be a row variable. In this case the update is
a row update, and the where clause may not be specified.

The set clause specifies a list of columns to be updated in the target,
and the new values for each column. The values given for each column
must be assignment-compatible with the type of the column. The
expression specifying the new value for each column can access the
current values of the target row by name.

The update statement includes an optional
*link:D4LGTableExpressions-Where.html[where]* specification that
indicates which rows of the target expression are to be updated. It is
an error to specify an update condition when the target is a row
variable.

The following example illustrates the use of the D4 update statement:

....
update Customer set { Name := "Sally Johnson" } where ID = 5;
....

[[D4LGDataManipulation-DeleteStatement]]
== Delete

The delete statement allows the data in a given table variable or
expression to be removed.

The delete statement in D4 has the following syntax:

....
<delete statement> ::=
    delete [<language modifiers>] <expression>
....

The delete must not violate any constraint of the database.

The variable or expression given by
link:D4LGLanguageElements-Expressions.html[<expression>] need not be a
table variable. The target can be a table expression of arbitrary
complexity. In this case, the updatability mechanism for views is used
to perform the delete. For more information on how modifications are
made to views, refer to the documentation for each table operator in
this guide.

The following examples illustrate the use of the D4 delete statement:

....
// deletes all employees with an ID greater than 3
delete Employee where ID > 3;

delete Employee; // deletes all employees
....
