= Dataphor Product Anatomy
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book

:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy]]
== Summary

This chapter introduces the Dataphor product, and discusses how it
enables automated application development.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-Overview]]
== Overview

The Dataphor product is an application development platform based on the
declarative approach using the relational model. It consists of the
following major components:

[horizontal]
Dataphor Server:: The core of the Dataphor product that exposes all
the services and capabilities required to enable automated application
development.
Frontend Server:: A set of services exposed as a library in the
Dataphor Server that the Frontend Clients can utilize to enable
automated application development.
Frontend Clients:: A set of "thin" clients designed to consume
Dataphor applications.
Dataphoria:: An Integrated Development Environment (IDE) for building,
administering and maintaining Dataphor applications.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-DataphorServer]]
== Dataphor Server

The Dataphor Server is designed to enable automated application
development. In order to achieve this goal, the Dataphor Server plays
two major roles. Firstly, it acts as an insulating layer between the
application and the data storage systems it uses. Secondly, it acts as
an environment for declarative application development by providing the
services and capabilities discussed in the previous chapters. In both of
these roles, the Dataphor Server is used by the application in much the
same way that a traditional DBMS is used.

The Dataphor Server functions as a DBMS in that it must coordinate
requests from multiple users to access the same data. Ensuring that each
user request is fulfilled efficiently and correctly is a highly
non-trivial task. In order to accomplish the process, the functionality
of the Dataphor Server is divided into subsystems:

* Manager
* Catalog
* Compiler
* Query Processor
* Storage Integrator

Each subsystem is responsible for a specific set of tasks in the overall
system. The Manager coordinates the interaction between the different
subsystems. The Catalog is the repository for the data structures which
the Dataphor Server can access. The Compiler is responsible for
translating user requests into efficient executable plans, which the
Query Processor is then responsible for executing. The Storage
Integrator provides the abstraction layer through which all data in the
Dataphor Server is accessed.

Collectively, these subsystems reside in a .NET Framework application
domain hosted within an operating system process. This is known as a
Dataphor Server _instance_ and represents a single Dataphor Server
providing data management services for a single database. Note that,
like a traditional DBMS, the Dataphor Server can host multiple
applications within a single instance.

A Dataphor Server instance can be hosted within any .NET Framework
application, or within a Windows Service. For more information on
configuring the Dataphor Server as a Windows Service, see the Dataphor
User's Guide.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-DataphorServer-Manager]]
=== Manager

The Manager controls the interaction between all the subsystems of the
Dataphor Server. It manages running processes, routes user requests, and
coordinates the actions of the different storage systems with which the
Dataphor Server communicates. The tasks of the manager are divided into
layers as follows:

* Server
* Session
* Process
* Plan
* Cursor

The manager exposes the functionality of the Dataphor Server at these
different layers through the Call-Level Interface (CLI), an Application
Programming Interface (API) designed specifically for use with the
Dataphor Server. The CLI is a set of .NET Framework interfaces which
allow programmatic access to the functionality of the Dataphor Server.
Each layer of the manager architecture has a corresponding level in the
CLI which exposes the functionality associated at that level.

All the functionality and capabilities of the Dataphor Server are
exposed through a data access language called D4. This language provides
the interface to the logical model of the system, and is the main
application development language for Dataphor applications. It is an
imperative language in the syntactic style of Pascal, extended to
include all the functionality of a database management language. In
particular, it is a relationally complete language based on the
relational algebra. For a complete discussion of the D4 language, see
the D4 Language Guide in this manual.

The CLI is the lowest level of access to the Dataphor Server. On top of
the CLI, higher-level access mechanisms are available such as the
Dataphor Data Access Components (DAC). For complete references for the
CLI and the DAC, refer to the Dataphor Reference.

Briefly, the server level controls all the global tasks such as system
configuration and startup. The session manages the tasks associated with
each user such as user configuration and starting and stopping
processes. The process is the basic level of execution in the Dataphor
Server, and coordinates the actions of the compiler and query processor
to fulfill requests from the user. The plan manages tasks associated
with prepared statements such as structural and metadata description and
cursor requests. And finally, the cursor level manages tasks associated
with the retrieval of results. Each of these levels are discussed in
detail in the CLI discussion in the Presentation Layer part of this
manual.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-DataphorServer-Catalog]]
=== Catalog

The catalog of the Dataphor Server is the central repository for the
application schema, or the description of the structure of the database.
The catalog also contains such items as compiled operators, storage
device descriptions, and security information. All this information is
used by the various subsystems to provide the functionality exposed by
the Dataphor Server. For example, the manager uses the catalog to ensure
that a given connection request is made by a valid user of the system;
the compiler uses the catalog to ensure that a given statement
references valid objects in the database; and so on.

The catalog is exposed through D4 as a set of tables containing rows
which describe the current contents of the catalog. For example, there
is a table variable called System.Operators which has a row for every
operator in the system. For a complete description of the system
catalog, refer to the System Library Reference in the Dataphor
Reference.

Catalog objects can be created, altered, and dropped through the use of
Data Definition Language (DDL) statements of the D4 language. For a
complete description of each of these statements, refer to the D4
Language Guide in this manual.

Each object in the catalog can have _metadata_ associated with it, which
is additional information that is ignored by the logical model. Metadata
is used by specific applications to provide extra information about each
object. For example, the Frontend uses a tag called Frontend.Title to
determine the presentation layer description for a corresponding
user interface element.

The entire catalog is divided into units called libraries. Every catalog
object is contained within some library. Libraries provide the
fundamental deployment unit for Dataphor applications. They also form a
unit of dependency tracking, in that the objects contained within a
library cannot reference objects in other libraries unless the library
they are in depends on the library containing the object being
referenced.

The Dataphor Server catalog contains the following types of objects:

* Libraries
* Scalar Types
* Tables
* Views
* Constraints
* References
* Operators
* Devices
* Users
* Roles
* Rights
* Event Handlers
* Conversions
* Sorts

For more information on each of these types of objects, see the
<<D4Catalog.adoc#D4LGCatalogElements, Catalog Elements>> section of the D4
Language Guide in this manual.

For more information on using these elements to construct a Dataphor
Application, refer to the link:DDGLogicalApplicationDesign.html[Logical
Application Design] part of this manual.

For more information on the security system of the Dataphor Server,
refer to the link:DUGP3Security.html[Security] chapter of the Dataphor
User's Guide.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-DataphorServer-Compiler]]
=== Compiler

The compiler subsystem is responsible for ensuring the syntactic and
semantic correctness of a given user request, and for producing an
executable plan to fulfill that request. User requests are made in terms
of D4, the native language of the Dataphor Server

The compilation process is divided up into the following phases:

* Lexical Analysis
* Syntactic Analysis
* Semantic Analysis
* Optimization
* Binding

The output from one phase functions as the input to the next phase of
the process. The input to the lexical analysis phase is the user request
as a string of characters, and the output from the binding phase is a
compiled plan ready for execution in the query processor.

The lexical analysis phase is concerned with transforming a given string
of characters into a sequence of tokens. This phase is also responsible
for removing comments and whitespace from the input stream.

The syntactic analysis phase is concerned with ensuring that a given
stream of tokens forms a correct statement of the language. This process
is handled by the parser. The output of this phase is a syntactically
correct representation of the user request.

The semantic analysis phase is concerned with ensuring that a given user
request is meaningful. This phase involves resolving identifiers and
operator invocations, and performing type checking. During this phase,
the compiler makes use of the catalog to perform identifier and operator
resolution. The output of this phase is a direct translation of the user
request into instructions for use in the query processor. This is a
preliminary version of the plan that has not been bound to actual
storage locations yet, but it is guaranteed to be semantically correct.
Once the compiler reaches this phase, the user request is known to be a
correct program of D4.

The optimization phase is concerned with high-level transformations to
the user request in an attempt to produce a more efficient execution
plan. For example, if a user request contains a restrict followed
immediately by a restrict, the two restricts can be combined into one
without changing the semantics of the statement, and yielding better
performance.

The binding phase is concerned with access-path determination, and
device selection. Device selection is done through a process called
query chunking, in which the processor instructions are considered from
the retrieval steps up. At each step of the query, the devices involved
are asked to prepare an equivalent execution. If a device is capable of
performing a particular step of the query, it is assigned to do so.
Otherwise, the Dataphor Server must process the query. Access-path
determination is concerned with finding an efficient method to access
the actual data. This involves such tactics as using an index to process
a given restriction or recognizing that a join could be done more
efficiently by sorting both sides prior to performing the join.

Once all these phases of the compilation process have occurred, the plan
is ready for actual execution within the query processor. The type of
the result, if any, is known, and the request is known to be a
semantically valid program of D4 instructions. Of course, this does not
mean that run-time errors cannot occur, only that the system understands
the request and is ready to attempt to perform it.

The various inference mechanisms of the Dataphor Server are all
implemented in the compiler. Type inference is the most basic form of
inference, and involves determining the result type of an expression. In
addition, if the expression is table-valued, the compiler must infer
structural information about the result such as keys, orders,
constraints, defaults, references, metadata, and so on. The compiler
also determines the various characteristics of the statement or
expression, which determines whether or not it is valid in a given
context. For a more complete discussion of the inference mechanisms of
the D4 language, see the D4 Language Guide in this manual.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-DataphorServer-QueryProcessor]]
=== Query Processor

The query processor is responsible for actually performing the
operations requested by users. A compiled plan in the Dataphor Server
consists of a hierarchical representation of the action to be performed.
Each operation is a node in the tree, and the children of any given node
are the operands to the operation. For a typical query, this means that
the leaves of the tree end in retrieval from devices, and the root of
the tree is the result. For table operations, each node in this tree is
actually a cursor which performs the requested operation. In this way,
results are only materialized as they are requested. This approach to
query processing is called _pipelining_ and means that if the results of
a query are never requested, i.e., the cursor is never stepped through,
the results may never be materialized (of course, they will be
materialized if required, for example if an operation requires sorted
input and no index exists to satisfy the required order, but the
Dataphor Server will only materialize intermediate results when
necessary).

Query updatability is also implemented using this approach. When a data
modification request is made on the cursor, it is propagated through
each node of the plan.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-DataphorServer-StorageIntegrator]]
=== Storage Integrator

The Storage Integrator (SI) utilizes an architecture called Storage
Integration Architecture (SIA) and is concerned with providing an
abstraction layer through which all data can be retrieved and
manipulated. Data from this layer is presented to the Dataphor Server in
the form of cursors, so the SI can take over the execution of a node in
the tree of a query plan at any point. This replacement forms the basis
of the query distribution capabilities of the Dataphor Server, resulting
in seamless access and manipulation capabilities to disparate sources.

Because the SIA is abstracting other DBMSs, the division of tasks in the
architecture closely mirrors that of a typical DBMS. Like the Dataphor
Server itself, the functionality is layered into a hierarchy as follows:

* Device
* Device Session
* Device Plan
* Device Cursor

The central abstraction mechanism of the SIA is the __device__. A device
manages the instance level configuration and settings of a storage
system with which the Dataphor Server can communicate. A device is also
responsible for providing translation services between instructions of
D4 and the appropriate instructions for the target system.

Each process in the Dataphor Server can communicate with any number of
devices, and each device can support multiple requests from different
processes. This relationship is managed by the process using a __device
session__. Each process will have one device session for each device
with which it must communicate. This device session coordinates
transaction management between the Dataphor Server and the target
system, and allows for requests coming in from the process to be
prepared against the device.

Preparing a request from the Dataphor Server results in a __device
plan__. Just as in the Dataphor Server, a device plan is ready for
execution within the device. For SQL devices, this means that the
requested instructions of D4 have been translated into an equivalent
statement of SQL. If the device does not support the requested
operation, the compiler binds that step of the query to the Dataphor
Server, rather than to the device.

Once a request has been prepared, it can be executed against the device.
If the request is a statement, the action is executed. Otherwise the
operation opens a _device cursor_ ranging over the result set produced
by the device. This can either be returned directly to the CLI if the
device was capable of performing the entire query, or it can be used as
an argument to the next operation in the query processor. In either
case, a cursor is used, so the pipelined approach is still maintained,
at least by the Dataphor Server.

Manipulation is also propagated to devices where possible. Note that the
chunking of a query for retrieval may be done at a different level than
for update. For example, a device may be able to process a join, but not
be able to update through it.

The translation process that occurs is specific to each device, however
there are certain common facilities which can be provided to ease the
task. For instance, every device must be capable of producing data in a
format compatible with the types of the Dataphor Server. This gives rise
to a mapping layer between the device and the data types in the catalog.
For each scalar type that the device supports, a _scalar type map_ is
specified on the device. This scalar type map implements the translation
of values of a given type to and from the device representation of the
value and the host representation of the value within the Dataphor
Server.

In addition, each device may be capable of performing many of the
operators in the Dataphor Server. Again, this is facilitated by a
mapping layer between the device and the operators in the catalog. For
each operator which the device supports, an _operator map_ is provided
which handles the task of translating a given statement of D4 into the
appropriate commands for the target system. Note that the existence of
an operator map does not alone constitute support for a query containing
the operator. The decision to support a particular query is based on
several factors, of which supporting the operators and types referenced
by the expression are only two.

Each device may also provide a mapping between users of D4 and users of
the target system. This is accomplished using a __device user__. Device
users can be created and manipulated using system provided operators in
the Dataphor Server, or the visual security management interfaces
exposed by Dataphoria. If no device user is specified, the Dataphor
Server will use the credentials specified on the device itself. If no
configuration is specified on the device, the Dataphor Server will use
the credentials of the D4 user.

The result of this process is that both data access and data
manipulation across devices is made completely transparent to users of
the Dataphor Server. True logical data independence is achieved, as the
results of any query, and hence any view, can be retrieved and updated
without regard to the actual location of the data. A view can be defined
which joins the data from a Microsoft SQL Server and an Oracle Server,
and the view still behaves as if it were a single base table.

In addition, because the Dataphor Server itself is capable of processing
the results of any expression of the relational algebra, any given query
will always execute. This is true regardless of the level of relational
support provided by the devices involved.

For more information on creating and manipulating devices, refer to the
<<D4Catalog.adoc#D4LGCatalogElements, Catalog Elements>>
chapter of the D4 Language Guide in this manual.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-DataphorServer-AutomatedApplicationDevelopmentServices]]
=== Automated Application Development Services

In addition to the services and capabilities of a traditional database
management system, the Dataphor Server exposes various services aimed at
enabling automated application development. These include:

* Query and View Updatability
* Advanced Business-Rule Enforcement
* Metadata Services
* Application Transactions
* Navigational Access
* Proposable Interfaces

[[DDGQueryandViewUpdatability]]
==== Query and View Updatability

The Dataphor Server allows for updates against arbitrarily complex
expressions (queries and views). The golden rule for updatability within
the Dataphor Server is as follows:

"No update operation must ever be allowed to leave any [table] in a
state that violates its own predicate." [3]

This updatability is possible because of the type inference mechanism.
The result of this updatability is that the data consumer does not need
to know the details of a given view. To a consumer, the Dataphor Server
appears as a set of table variables, which all behave the same way
whether they are declared as tables or views. This achieves a high
degree of logical data independence, and allows the developer of the
application schema to rearrange the logical model internally, without
affecting the consumer's external view of that model.

[[DDGAdvancedBusiness-RuleEnforcement]]
==== Advanced Business Rule Enforcement


Integrity constraints constitute the "business rules" of an application,
and are an essential part of the application schema. The Dataphor Server
provides the ability to easily declare such constraints at different
levels of the schema. Constraints can be declared that enforce rules for
the entire database, down to rules that affect only a single column or
data type. Declarative database-wide integrity constraints allow
advanced rules to be easily expressed that would ordinarily require
multiple "triggers" to be written, if they could be enforced at all.

[[DDGMetadataServices]]
==== Metadata Services

The schema of a Dataphor application can be adorned with additional
application-specific information called metadata. These additional
attributes are then made available with the structure of the result set
of any query and can be used by the application for whatever purpose
desired.

The Frontend Services utilize this metadata, along with other structural
information exposed by the application schema to enable the process of
user interface derivation. The metadata can be used to provide hints to
the derivation process such as what the title of a given column should
be, or whether or not to include a reference as an embedded detail on a
particular user interface.

Metadata is also inferred by the compiler through expressions of the D4
language. The type inference mechanisms of the D4 compiler have been
extended to include metadata inference, as well as other structural
information such as defaults, constraints, orders and so on.

[[DDGApplicationTransactions]]
==== Application Transactions

In addition to typical pessimistic transaction support, the Dataphor
Server features Application Transactions, which are a type of
optimistically concurrent transaction where concurrency control is not
required, and consistency is checked at the time of commit. Application
transactions are managed at the session level and can be joined by
multiple processes within the same Dataphor Server.

A common problem encountered when writing applications is dealing with
data entry and modification in a database containing complex rules. For
example, a master/detail relationship (one-to-many) between tables
enforced by a referential integrity constraint is common in application
schemas. In many cases, a master row may not be "complete" until the
appropriate detail rows are in place. Because of the integrity
constraint, the master row must be present in the database before the
detail rows.

Typical transaction support allows the rows to be entered simultaneously
(although it should be noted that not all SQL-based DBMS products
support this), but because transaction concurrency is handled
pessimistically (i.e. by locking resources), transactions must be kept
as short as possible to minimize resource contention.

For this reason, most applications do not solve this user interface
problem using transaction support. Rather, it is typically handled by
the developer within the presentation layer. Even with the aid of
development tools that help developers accomplish the tasks of caching,
this caching is an unnecessary burden, and is not a general solution.
Hard-coded caching only works for the manipulation patterns anticipated
by the developer. Application Transactions handle these problems in a
general way, without requiring additional effort by the developer.

An application transaction is a managed buffer that mirrors exactly the
application schema, with the exception of the constraints that would
cause problems in the user interfaces, namely any constraint that
involves more than one table. All the structural information available
in the application schema is visible as part of the application
transaction. And because the management of application transactions is
automatically handled by the data access layer of the Dataphor clients,
the entire process is transparent.

[[DDGNavigationalAccess]]
==== Navigational Access

One of the most difficult problems in any database application is the
presentation of a natural and intuitive search. The Dataphor Server
solves this problem by providing navigational access to data using its
_browse_ capability. Using *browse* instead of *order* as part of the
cursor definition provides this navigational access.

Cursor operations such as backwards navigation and searching can be
performed efficiently against relational and indexed-access data sources
when using a browse based cursor. As the browse cursor is navigated and
searched, the query processor opens cursors internally based on
appropriately transformed expressions. For example, when the user
searches for the name "Karl", the underlying expression is modified to
return all rows greater than or equal to the search criteria. This type
of access is enabled against expressions of arbitrary complexity, not
just simple table expressions.

Because of the this navigational access, user interfaces can be built
based on browse cursors that are easy and efficient to search and
navigate. The developer is not concerned with fetching data subsets, and
the end user can see what they perceive as the entire table. In reality,
only the data actually being presented is retrieved from the Dataphor
Server.

[[DDGProposableInterfaces]]
==== Proposable Interfaces

The Dataphor Server is capable of answering questions about modification
operations that are about to be performed. During data entry processes,
rows are built a column at a time as the user enters data. The Dataphor
Server provides a set of _proposable_ interfaces that allow the
application to perform intermediate processing while this data entry is
occurring. There are three types of proposable questions.

* *Default* is designed to provide the initial state for a newly
inserted row. When applications begin the process of data entry, this
interface can be used to determine the default values for the columns of
the table such as a new surrogate identifier for the row.
* *Validate* is designed to provide a mechanism for immediate value
validation on a column level. As values are entered, this interface can
be used to determine whether they would violate any constraint of the
column or data type.
* *Change* is designed to provide a mechanism for displaying the
predicted results of an operation. After a value has been entered, this
interface can be used to request the affects of the change on the rest
of the row, such as a calculated column.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-FrontendServer]]
== Frontend Server

The Frontend Server is a set of services built as a library in D4 and
housed within the Dataphor Server. These services are primarily
concerned with the presentation layer of a Dataphor application. The
Frontend Server provides _document_ support, query elaboration
capabilities, user interface derivation services, and application entry
points.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-FrontendServer-FrontendLibraryExtensions]]
=== Frontend Library Extensions

The Frontend Server extends the concept of a library in the Dataphor
Server to include the notion of a __document__. A document is the
logical manifestation of an operating system file. Each document resides
within a specific library, and has a name, which must be unique within
that library. Documents are of some specific document type, and that
type governs how the various Frontend services will deal with the
document.

The Frontend Server exposes an API for dealing with documents. Standard
I/O functionality is available for loading and saving documents, as well
as other, more specialized functionality.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-FrontendServer-FrontendForms]]
=== Frontend Forms

One important type of document is a Dataphor Form Document. These
documents contain the complete description of a presentation layer
user interface. These documents can be built manually, or the Frontend
Server can be used to derive them automatically. In either case, the
Frontend Server provides the ability to customize these forms through
the use of __visual form inheritance__.

This process allows forms to be based on existing forms, and then
modified for a specific use. These modifications can include the
rearrangement of controls on the form, the modification of properties of
the various elements on the form, and even the addition of new elements
to the form. These modifications are then saved in a Customized Dataphor
Form Document, which saves only the difference between the original form
and the customization. When a customization is based on a derived
user interface, this allows the customization to be made without
impacting the dynamic nature of the application.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-FrontendServer-User-InterfaceDerivation]]
=== User-Interface Derivation

The Frontend Server also exposes an API for automatically producing
Dataphor Form Documents based on the application schema. Various types
of interfaces can be produced, for example, a _Browse_ interface for a
given table can be produced, which will provide a table-level
user interface to the data in the table. Row-level user interfaces can
also be produced.

The user interface derivation process by default also includes
references to other tables and views in the database. These references
are exposed appropriately on the derived user interface. For example,
when browsing the employees table, the employee phones table could
appear as an item on the _Details_ menu of the resulting user interface.

In addition to the default behavior provided by the Frontend Server, the
derivation can be controlled through the use of metadata in the
application schema. For example, the _Frontend.Embedded_ tag can be used
to indicate that a given reference should be embedded into the
user interface for a given table. This allows the user interfaces to be
tailored to an application's specific requirements, while still allowing
those user interfaces to be derived.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-FrontendClients]]
== Frontend Clients

The Dataphor platform utilizes a generic user interface description
language to allow clients based on different platforms to consume the
same application. In this way, Dataphor applications can be defined one
time, and deployed on multiple platforms.

Both clients expose use the concept of an _alias_ to manage connection
information with a specific Dataphor Server instance. The alias
specifies the server instance, manages authentication information, and
contains session-specific settings required to connect to a Dataphor
Server. Each client exposes a set of interfaces for visually managing
these aliases.

Once a connection is established, the clients then provide an interface
to select an application from the list of applications deployed on that
Dataphor Server instance. This process can be bypassed, if desired.

Each client communicates with the Dataphor Server using the Data Access
Layer, requests the user interfaces described by the application, and
manages the interaction with the user. Because of the services and
capabilities exposed by the Dataphor Server, these processes can be
completely automated. The resulting clients provide a rich
user interface experience that is defined entirely within the
centralized application schema.

The Dataphor product ships with a Windows and Web Client, but the
architecture is designed to be extensible, and other clients could be
easily developed for environments like PDA's and cell phones.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-Dataphoria]]
== Dataphoria

Dataphoria is an Integrated Development Environment for building
Dataphor Applications. It provides a visual interface to perform various
administrative functions in the Dataphor Server, as well as a
hierarchical representation of the catalog, visual forms designer, and
integrated ad-hoc query support.

For more information on using Dataphoria, refer to the Dataphor User's
Guide.

[[DDGDataphorProductAnatomy-Conclusions]]
== Conclusions

Application development is an extremely complex and multi-faceted
problem. Software developers today are faced with the challenge of
building applications faster, better, and cheaper, all at the same time.
While there is no "Silver Bullet", raising the level of abstraction at
which applications are built will dramatically reduce the complexity of
the problems, and allow developers to focus on the core issues of an
application, rather than the tedious and mundane issues of day-to-day
development.

The Dataphor product provides an extremely flexible platform for
application development. The features of the product are exposed as
layers of enabling technologies that can each be used to achieve higher
and higher levels of automated application development. The product was
built from the ground up with extensibility in mind, so that even if the
platform does not immediately support a desired capability, that support
could be provided by systems developers extending the platform. The
result is a truly revolutionary next-generation development platform
that will continue to evolve with the ever-increasing complexity of
application development.

The remainder of this manual is devoted to explaining how to take
advantage of the features exposed by the Dataphor product in order to
realize the full potential of automated application development.
