= Devices
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book

:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[DDGDevices]]
== Summary

The first step to be taken in mapping a logical application schema onto
a target system is to construct the device in the Dataphor Server that
will model the target system.

This chapter discusses the various devices available for the Dataphor
platform, and how they can be used to provide persistence for Dataphor
applications.

[[DDGDevices-AvailableDevices]]
== Available Devices

The Dataphor Server provides several devices as shown in the following
list:

* Memory Device
+
The memory device provides in-memory storage. Data stored in this device
is not persisted to disk.
* Simple Device
+
The simple device provides basic persistence for tables in the Dataphor
Server. Although the device is transactional, concurrency is enforced
with exclusive table access. As a result, this device is intended for
single-user applications with low data volume.
* Microsoft SQL Server
+
This device provides full integration with Microsoft SQL Server.
* Oracle
+
This device provides full integration with the Oracle database system.
* DB2
+
This device provides full integration with the IBM DB2 Universal DBMS.
It is also capable of providing full integration with the IBM DB2/400
DBMS, by setting the Product attribute of the device.
* Generic SQL
+
This device provides a starting point for building Device interfaces to
other SQL based database systems.

Additionally, developers can provide custom devices to enable access to
any data store. Each device must provide at least forward only cursor
access to the data. If the device is updatable, it must also be capable
of executing update statements, or of accepting row-level update
commands.

As more devices are built, they will be included with the product. Check
the Alphora website at www.alphora.com for the latest information on
available devices.

For more information on building custom devices, refer to the Dataphor
Device Development Kit, available from the Alphora website.

[[DDGDevices-AvailableDevices-MemoryDevice]]
=== Memory Device

The memory device provides a mechanism for storing data in-memory.
Storage is not persistent (meaning that it will not survive a restart of
the Dataphor Server), but the device does provide full transactional
support, and minimal concurrency protection.

The Temp system device is a memory device used by the internal query
processor to materialize intermediate results, and store process- and
session-scoped table variables. The Storage.Scope tag can be used to
specify the scope for the storage of a table variable.

Regardless of the scope of the table variable, the definition of the
type and structure of the table variable is the same for the all scopes.
However, the contents of the table variable will vary based on the
scope. For database-scoped table variables (the default), the same
storage is provided for all sessions and processes. For session-scoped
table variables, a different storage space is provided for each session,
and similarly for process-scoped table variables, a different storage
space is provided for each process.

Session- and process-scoped table variables are useful for providing
data storage that may be unique to a particular user-session or form.
For example, session-scoped table variables can be used to store session
context such as shopping cart information, while process-scoped table
variables can be used to store form-specific information such as the
current contents of a filter.

In addition to these tasks, the memory device is ideally suited for
prototyping and initial development. The memory device requires no
scalar type mappings, and will support any table variable that can be
described in D4, even when user-defined types are involved.

The memory device does not support any operation other than base table
retrieval and ordering, so no operator mappings are required. Note that
this does not mean that queries involving operators other than retrieval
and ordering cannot be evaluated, it simply means that the query
processor will perform the operations, not the device.

For more information on using the memory device, refer to the
link:DRSystemLibrary.html[System Library Reference].

[[DDGDevices-AvailableDevices-SimpleDevice]]
=== Simple Device

The simple device is a memory device that has been extended to provide
basic persistence using a file for each table stored in the device. The
directory used can be specified as part of the device definition, but
defaults to the Data subdirectory of the Dataphor Server runtime
directory.

As with the memory device, the simple device does support transactions,
but concurrency is implemented via exclusive table-level locks, so the
device is not intended to support multi-user applications.

The simple device requires no scalar type mappings, and will support any
table variable that can be described in D4, even when user-defined types
are involved.

The simple device does not support any operation other than base table
retrieval and ordering, so no operator mappings are required. Note that
this does not mean that queries involving operators other than retrieval
and ordering cannot be evaluated, it simply means that the query
processor will perform the operations, not the device.

For more information on using the simple device, refer to the
link:DRSimpleDeviceLibrary.html[Simple Device Library Reference].

[[DDGDevices-AvailableDevices-SQLDevices]]
=== SQL Devices

The Dataphor toolset includes several devices designed to support
various commercial SQL-based DBMSs. The common aspects of supporting
these systems are handled by the base SQL device, introduced in the
SQLDevice library. The base SQL device does not contain any actual
devices, but provides services and host-implementations that other
devices utilize.

Note that while this device could be said to support the ANSI standard
version of SQL, this is not entirely correct. No system implements the
standard completely, and each system deviates from the standard enough
to prevent the construction of a single device capable of supporting all
SQL systems. As a result, the SQL that is common among the different
systems is only the portion that they all implement the same way. For
this reason, we choose to call the SQL support implemented by the base
device __Common SQL__.

Common SQL support is provided by extending the infrastructure of the
Dataphor Server to support the different aspects of an SQL-based DBMS.
This involves extending language support, providing data type and
language translation services, and providing a connectivity layer which
the Dataphor Server can use to communicate with these systems. The
actual base SQL device then coordinates the use of these layers to
provide the framework for supporting specific SQL-based systems.

[[DDGSQLLanguage]]
==== SQL Language

In order to understand how the SQL devices provide translation for the
D4 statements, it is important to understand how the Dataphor Server
transforms commands written in D4 into query plans ready for execution
within the D4 processor.

This process is generally called compilation, and within the Dataphor
Server, it is comprised of four basic steps:

1.  Lexical Analysis (also called __lexing__)
2.  Syntactic Analysis (also called __parsing__)
3.  Semantic Analysis (also called __compiling__)
4.  Access Path Determination (also called __binding__)

The first step, lexical analysis, is concerned with transforming the
statements given by the user into a sequence of _tokens_ that can be
easily consumed by the next phase. This process is concerned with
recognizing keywords and symbols of the language.

The second step, syntactic analysis, is concerned with verifying that
the syntax, or structure, of the statement is a valid construct of the
language. The product of this step is called __abstract syntax tree__,
and is a conceptual representation of the statement that can be easily
consumed by the next phase.

The third step, semantic analysis, is concerned with verifying that all
the identifiers and operator invocations called for in the statement are
valid. This phase ensures that identifiers within the statement refer to
known objects in the catalog, and that the arguments to each operator
invocation are of the appropriate type. The product of this step is an
__execution plan__, which must then be _bound_ to actual data access
paths in order to be executed.

The fourth step, access path determination, is when the device binding
actually occurs. The chunking algorithm described above is used to
determine which devices are involved in a particular query, and where
the processing boundaries will be placed. It is important to note that
each device is actually a compiler in and of itself, producing an
execution plan for use in generating the statement to be given to the
target system.

The process of preparing a given statement or expression branch for
execution on a target system is actually the reverse of the first three
steps outlined above. The device analyzes the execution plan prepared by
the Dataphor Server, and produces an abstract syntax tree representing
an SQL statement to perform the required operation. This representation
is then given to an _emitter_ which produces a string ready to be passed
to the target system.

The elements of an abstract syntax tree are described using a __document
object model__. This model provides a hierarchical representation of the
statement to be executed. Each language has a unique document object
model containing the appropriate elements for the representation of that
language. The SQL device introduces the common elements of the document
object model required for representing Common SQL, and each specific SQL
device introduces the variants necessary to represent the dialectic
differences for each target system.

Each device also introduces an emitter for use in transforming abstract
syntax trees into actual strings of the appropriate dialect. In this
way, each device is capable of precisely describing the specific dialect
of SQL that is used by a given system, both in terms of the semantic and
syntactic differences from Common SQL.

[[DDGSQLConnectivity]]
==== SQL Connectivity

Common SQL support introduces a connectivity layer for handling
communication with different SQL-based DBMSs. This layer abstractly
describes the behaviors required by the Common SQL device, and its
descendants. Specific implementations of connectivity layers are then
provided to communicate with the different data access methodologies
available for existing systems.

The Dataphor toolset provides several implementations of this
connectivity layer. These wrap common data access technologies, and
expose them to the SQL devices. In addition, new data access
technologies can easily be exposed by providing an SQL Connectivity
implementation. The following table lists the available implementations
as of the preparation of this document. More may be made available in
the future as necessary.

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Data Access Technology |SQL Connectivity Connection Class
|ADO |ADOConnection.ADOConnection

|ADO.NET Provider for Microsoft SQL Server |SQLDevice.MSSQLConnection

|ADO.NET Provider for OLE DB |SQLDevice.OLEDBConnection

|ADO.NET Provider for ODBC |ODBCConnection.ODBCConnection

|Microsoft ADO.NET Provider for Oracle
|MSOracleConnection.OracleConnection

|IBM ADO.NET Data Provider for DB2 |DB2Connection.DB2Connection
|=======================================================================

The connectivity layer for the base SQL device handles most of the tasks
involved in connecting to the target systems. These tasks include basic
connectivity, transaction coordination, and connection management.

For more information on a specific connectivity implementation, refer to
the reference documentation for the library containing the
implementation.

[[DDGP2BasicConnectivity]]
===== Basic Connectivity

Basic communications with the target system are handled by an SQL
connectivity implementation. The connectivity implementation to be used
is specified by the value of the ConnectionClass attribute, which
specifies the registered class to be used. Once a connectivity
implementation has been selected, the device must connect to the target
system using an appropriate set of connection parameters.

All SQL-based connectivity implementations use the concept of a
_connection string_ to specify connection information. A connection
string is a set of name-value pairs called __connection parameters__.
Each connection parameter specifies some aspect of connecting to the
target system such as ServerName or UserID. Each device registers a set
of _connection string builder_ classes that can be used to build
connection strings for the device based on the set of connection
parameters available.

Each connectivity implementation and device combination uses some
connection string builder to build the appropriate connection string. By
default, each device specifies the correct connectivity implementation
and connection string builder. If a custom connectivity implementation
or connection string builder is desired, they can be specified using the
ConnectionClass and ConnectionStringBuilderClass attributes of the
device class definition, respectively.

Each SQL device also provides an attribute called ConnectionParameters
which can be used to specify additional configuration parameters for the
device. Device users may also specify configuration parameters for the
device. All these parameters are used by the connection string builder
to generate the appropriate connection string for the target system.

The following procedure is used to gather all the name-value pairs to be
used to construct the connection string:

The device adds any device-specific parameters such as ServerName or
DatabaseName.

The connection string builder maps any connection parameters to new
names, for example, the parameter ServerName may be mapped to the Data
Source parameter for an ODBCConnection.

Any connection parameters specified in the ConnectionParameters
attribute are added.

Any connection parameters specified on the device user mapping are
added.

The resulting set of connection parameters is used to construct a
semi-colon delimited list of name=value pairs, and this becomes the
connection string for the any connections to the target system.

[[DDGP2ConnectionMultiplexing]]
===== Connection Multiplexing

Transactions in the Dataphor Server are associated with a running
process. Because of this, device sessions are also associated with a
given process. If a transaction is in progress in the Dataphor Server, a
transaction must be in progress with the target system as well. This is
known as _transaction coordination_ and is managed by the process from
the Dataphor Server.

In order for this transaction coordination to work, the Dataphor Server
requires that a device session be capable of responding to transactional
requests, even if cursors are open against the device. In addition, the
Dataphor Server requires that the device session be able to open
multiple cursors within the same transaction. For SQL-based systems,
these requirements pose a non-trivial implementation problem, as
transactions are usually restricted to the communications session, and
transactions cannot be started and stopped independent of cursor
lifetimes. The base SQL device solves these problems with a mechanism
called __connection multiplexing__.

Connection multiplexing is the process by which a pool (possibly one) of
connections to a given target system is shared among multiple task
requests against the device session. The device session manages
connection multiplexing using two pools of connections: a _browse_ pool,
and an _execute_ pool.

The browse pool is used for connections which are known to be readonly
and have an isolation level of browse. All actions performed on
connections in the browse pool are done within a browse transaction
which allows the read of uncommitted data. Because the connections in
the browse pool do not have to participate in the same transaction, new
browse connections can be added as needed.

The execute pool is used for connections which may update data, or have
an isolation level higher than browse. All connections in the execute
pool participate in the same transaction against the target system. If
the target system supports multiple connections in a single transaction,
the execute pool can contain multiple connections, otherwise the execute
pool will only contain a single connection.

As requests are made against the device session, they are either
readonly browse requests, in which case the browse pool is used to
process the request, or they are possibly write requests which must be
processed by the execute pool. If all connections in the execute pool
are currently busy, the first connection in the pool is released, and
then moved to the back of the pool. The released connection can then be
used to service the request.

When connections are released, the cursor is still managed by the
Dataphor Server, which is responsible for collecting enough state to
resume the operation from the point where the connection was released.
The device cursor maintains a working buffer of the data being read from
any given connection. When the connection is released, the device cursor
will read from the working buffer until more data must be fetched. At
this point, the device cursor requests a connection from the device
session, and begins fetching data from the first row after the last row
in its working buffer.

In this way, a single transactional connection to the target system can
be utilized by multiple requests coming in from the Dataphor Server. The
value of the ConnectionBufferSize attribute of the device definition
determines the number of rows to keep in the working buffer of each
device cursor.

[[DDGDevices-CreatingtheDevice]]
== Creating the Device

The Shipping application is built to use the MSSQLDevice. The following
statement illustrates the creation of this device and the user mappings
associated with it:

....
create device Shipping
    reconciliation { mode = { command }, master = device }
    class "MSSQLDevice.MSSQLDevice"
        attributes
        {
            "ServerName" = ".",
            "DatabaseName" = "Shipping",
            "UseQualifiedNames" = "true"
        };

CreateDeviceUser("Admin", Name("Shipping"), "sa", "");
CreateDeviceUser("System", Name("Shipping"), "sa", "");
....

This script creates the Shipping device, and the device user mappings
for the System and Admin users. The System user mapping is required to
enable the Dataphor Server system process to log into the device during
startup and shutdown processing. The Admin user mapping is required to
allow the Admin user to access the data in the device. In addition to
credentials, device user mappings can be used to specify additional
connection parameters that should only be used by a particular user.

Note that the authentication information for the device can also be
specified using the UserID and Password attributes of the device class
definition.

[[DDGDevices-CreatingtheDevice-DefaultDevice]]
=== Default Device

In addition to creating the Shipping device, the Shipping library
specifies that the device is to be used as the default device for the
library. This is specified on the library edit form, or by invoking the
SetDefaultDeviceName operator.

For a given session, the default device is the first unambiguously
specified default device name encountered in a breadth first traversal
of the library dependency graph above the current library for the
session.

Whenever a base table variable is created without specifying a device,
the default device name is used to determine where the table should be
stored. The default device name for the System library is Temp, meaning
that if no default device name is specified anywhere in the dependency
graph for the current library, the Temp device will be the ultimate
default.

The default device is also used to determine which device should be
checked when an automatic reconciliation is triggered. If a given
variable reference is not found within the catalog, and there is a
default device specified for the current session, and that device has
automatic reconciliation turned on, then a reconciliation with the
unknown identifier will be attempted. If a table is found in that device
matching the identifier, it is reconciled into the Dataphor Server
catalog.

By using default devices for libraries, table definitions can be built
independently of the device definitions in which they are stored. This
allows libraries to be re-created in different devices simply by
changing the default device name of the library footnote:[Obviously
changing the default device name of a library will have no effect on
existing table definitions. The new setting will only be used for
subsequent create table statements.]

[[DDGDevices-CreatingtheDevice-ReconciliationMode]]
=== Reconciliation Mode

In the Shipping application create device statement, the reconciliation
mode for the device is set to command. This means that any Data
Definition Language (DDL) statements (**create**, **alter**, or *drop*
statements) involving the device will be translated and executed against
the target system.

The reconciliation mode can be altered at any time. By setting the
reconciliation mode to none, all subsequent DDL statements involving the
device will have no effect on the target system.

Once the library has been registered and all tables have been created on
the target system, the reconciliation mode can be turned off, and the
library can be unregistered and re-registered without affecting the
tables, or data, in the target system. This can be useful in the later
stages of development when no base table variable changes are being
made. Rather than attempting to reconcile a given change using *alter*
statements against the schema, the entire library can be re-created
without affecting the target system.

Note also that while loading and unloading (during Startup or Shutdown,
or in response to a LoadLibrary or UnloadLibrary call), all devices will
ignore DDL commands, regardless of their respective reconciliation
settings.
