= Enforcing Security
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book
:toc:
:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[DDGEnforcingSecurity]]
== Summary

This chapter discusses the Dataphor security model from a development
perspective. It covers the basic concepts involved in the security
model, and the mechanisms designed for use by application developers to
expose security management points to application administrators.

[[DDGEnforcingSecurity-DataphorSecurityModel]]
== Dataphor Security Model

The Dataphor Security Model consists of the following three primitives:

* Rights
* Roles
* Users

Security RightsRightsRights form the basic unit of permission for
granting or revoking access to particular areas of a Dataphor
application schema. Any capability that needs to be protected from a
security standpoint should have an associated Right.

RolesSecurity RolesRoles provide a mechanism for managing groups of
right assignments, and form the basis of security management in a
Dataphor application schema.

UsersSecurity UsersUsers provide the basic mechanism for authentication
and authorization within a Dataphor Server. Each user is assigned a
unique UserID, and given a user-specified password.

OwnershipCatalog Objects OwnershipSecurity OwnershipIn addition to these
basic elements, objects in the D4 catalog are _owned_ by a specific
user. By default, this is the user that created the object, but
ownership can be transferred with the security API.

Catalog Objects RightsSecurity Catalog Object RightsEach object in the
catalog has an associated set of rights that are automatically created
and maintained to protect access to the various operations available on
that object such as alteration, execution, or manipulation. All these
rights are implicitly granted to the object owner.

Right AssignmentsSecurity Right AssignmentsUsers can have any number of
__right assignments__. Each right assignment indicates whether a given
user is granted or revoked a specific right.

Roles are sets of right assignments that can then be assigned all at
once to a particular user. Roles are catalog objects that are defined
with a library by the developer of the application.

Each user can be a member of any number of roles. As a member of a given
role, the user has all the right assignments associated with that role.
Note that in the event of conflicting right assignments, the most
restrictive right assignment of any role is used.

Security Rights DeterminationRights DeterminationWhen a specific right
is requested, the following steps are taken to discover whether the
right is granted or revoked:

* If the user has an explicit assignment for the right, the right is
granted or revoked according to the right assignment.
* If the roles which the user is a member of have an explicit assignment
for the right, the right is granted or revoked according to the most
restrictive right assignment of any role.
* If the user is the owner of the right, or the catalog object the right
is associated with, the right is considered granted.

For more detailed information on the Dataphor Security Model, refer to
link:DUGP3Security.html[Security] chapter in the Dataphor User's Guide.

[[DDGEnforcingSecurity-DesigningForSecurity]]
== Designing For Security

Rights and roles are catalog objects, belonging to a specific library
and owned by some user of the Dataphor Server. Users, on the other hand,
are global to the Dataphor Server, and are managed by the administrator
of the server instance. As such, applications should make no assumptions
about the users that will be available on a given system. Security from
the developer's perspective is a matter of ensuring that the appropriate
rights and roles are available to the administrator to enforce security
simply and effectively.

Ideally, the administrator of a Dataphor application should not need to
deal with managing specific right assignments to users. Rather, the
administrator should be concerned with managing the users of the
Dataphor Server, and with associating roles with those users.

This architecture leads to several important guidelines for developing
secure and manageable applications with Dataphor:

* Create roles for every anticipated usage pattern of the application.
* Rights for every object should be granted to some role.
* Roles should be intuitive and clearly named.
* Roles should be as flat as possible, with as little overlap in
functionality as possible.

[[DDGEnforcingSecurity-SecurityintheShippingApplication]]
== Security in the Shipping Application

In this section we describe the security implementation in place in the
Shipping Application as an example of using the security features of the
Dataphor platform. Recall from the requirements for the application that
there are three main categories of users: Management, Customer Service,
and Inventory Clerk.

Management users are responsible for managing other users, and
maintaining their access rights to the application. Fortunately, this
role is already handled by the Dataphor Security library. The Security
library provides user-interfaces for administering security in a
Dataphor Server, and exposes the SecurityUser role. Any user that is a
member of this role will have access to all the objects required to use
the user-interfaces exposed in the Security library.

To handle Customer Service users, the Shipping Application introduces
the CustomerService role. This role is granted access to table variables
such as CustomerDetail and SaleOrderEntry, as well as select access to
Location and ItemType.

For the Inventory Clerk users, the Shipping Application introduces the
InventoryClerk role, which is granted access to table variables such as
VendorDetail and PurchaseOrder. Inventory clerks are also given access
to the Location and ItemType tables so that they can manage inventory
and par levels.

In addition, the Shipping application defines the ShippingUser role,
which is granted access to all the common areas of the system. This role
is used to prevent overlap among the other roles.

By defining these roles, the application developer has identified the
areas of the application that can be configured from a security
standpoint. These roles can then be used by Dataphor Server
Administrators to deploy secure applications with very little
configuration involved.
