= Overview
:author: Alphora
:doctype: book

:data-uri:
:lang: en
:encoding: iso-8859-1

[[DDGOverview]]
== Summary

From the user's perspective, a Dataphor application
consists of a set of user interfaces that display information and accept
input. The presentation layer of the Dataphor platform contains the
architecture and services that provide these user interfaces. It is
comprised of several layers of technology that enable successively
higher levels of user interface automation, raising the level of
abstraction at which user interfaces can be described and executed. This
chapter introduces each of these layers in terms of the overall
architecture of the Dataphor Frontend.

Architecturally, the Frontend is divided into two main categories: the
Frontend Server, and the Frontend Clients. The Frontend Server provides
the services required by the presentation layer such as user interface
derivation and document retrieval. The Frontend Clients then use these
services to produce the presentation layer of a Dataphor application.

The Data Access Layer provides the bridge between the Dataphor Server
and the Frontend Clients. The services of the Frontend Server are
accessed through this layer using a set of components called the Data
Access Components (DAC).

The Forms Layer consists of the components and controls that make up the
user interfaces in a Dataphor application. These forms are defined as
documents and stored within the libraries of the application.
Effectively, the Forms layer enables a client-independent Rapid
Application Development (RAD) paradigm that can be used to build forms
either manually using a traditional forms designer, or dynamically by
invoking the user interface derivation services of the Frontend Server.

Lastly, the Frontend Clients bring all the capabilities and services of
the Frontend Server, Data Access, and Forms Layers together to present
the end-user with the actual application. Each Frontend Client is
responsible for displaying the application in a different platform such
as Microsoft Windows, or over the World-Wide Web.

The following sections will introduce each of these layers, and discuss
the preliminaries necessary to begin building the presentation layer of
the Shipping application.

== Frontend Server

The Frontend Server is actually a library within the Dataphor Server
called Frontend. This library extends the concept of a library within
the Dataphor Server to include __documents__, and introduces several
operators for producing user interface descriptions called _forms_ based
on the application schema.

=== Documents

Documents are the logical equivalent of _files_ in a traditional
development environment. They are used to house the various products of
the development process including database creation scripts, and form
definitions. They are centrally located within the libraries that
comprise the application.

Dataphor Form Documents (DFDs) provide the mechanism for persistence of
a statically defined Dataphor form. These documents are saved within the
libraries of an application, and can be loaded through the pipe
available on the session, or directly from the CLI using the
Frontend.Form operator.

Note that the Frontend.Form operator does not interpret the form
definition, it simply returns the form definition as a string value. The
Frontend Session's pipe services are used to translate the resulting
form definition into an appropriate presentation layer representation of
the form. This process is known as __deserialization__.

During the process of deserialization, as component types are
encountered, the system must be able to determine what class of
component to create. This decision is made based on the NodeTypes table
loaded by the Frontend Session. This table is loaded by aggregating the
component type definition documents (DNT) for the appropriate client
from each library in the application, tracing library dependencies
recursively. Each entry in this component types table specifies a .NET
Framework type to be used whenever a given component is to be created.
Although this type is not required to be client-specific, it can be.

For example, the Source entry specifies that the Frontend.Client.Source
.NET type be used to represent Source components. This entry is made for
both the Windows and Web clients. However, the TextBox entry specifies a
completely different class for the Windows client than for the Web. This
is because in the Windows client, the TextBox corresponds with a Windows
edit control, while in the Web client, a control rendering an <INPUT>
tag is used.

=== Derivation

One of the primary goals of the Dataphor platform is to provide
applications with as much insulation as possible from structural changes
in the database. In order to achieve this goal the application must be,
as much as possible, defined by the structure of the database. The
Frontend library provides the process of _derivation_ to enable this.

Internally, the process of user interface derivation is divided into two
main steps: __elaboration__, and __derivation__. Elaboration consists of
constructing an extended query based on a given query expression, and
the relationship between the given expression and other table variables
in the database. Derivation is in turn divided into three main steps:
__structuring__, __layout__, and __production__.

Structuring in derivation is the process of constructing user interface
controls for each column in the query, and grouping those controls as
appropriate for the context of each column. Layout consists of
determining the visual layout of the controls and groups constructed
during the structuring process. And finally, production consists of
actually building the form definition based on the controls and visual
layout determined by the previous steps.

The input to the derivation process is called the derivation __seed__,
and consists of the expression for which a user interface is to be
derived, the form type, or type of user interface, an optional set of
master and detail key names, and an indicator to determine whether or
not elaboration should be performed.

During the derivation process, the engine uses metadata tags associated
with the various structural definitions produced by the compiler. For
example, when determining the title for a particular derived
user interface, the derivation engine searches for the Frontend.Title
tag on the result set definition. If found, the value of this tag is
used as the title, otherwise, the unqualified name of the table, or the
expression itself is used as the title.

==== Queries as User Interface

Because of the high degree of logical data independence afforded by the
D4 language and the Dataphor query processor, the results of any
table-valued expression can be completely described, both in terms of
the structure of the table variable itself, as well as the relationship
of that table variable with the rest of the database.

The derivation engine uses the concept of _form types_ to differentiate
between the various types of user interfaces that can be derived.
Generally, these form types break down into two different categories:
_plural_ user interfaces, and _singular_ user interfaces.

Plural user interfaces are used primarily to expose searching and
navigation capabilities, and are capable of displaying the result set
for a particular table or expression. Singular user interfaces display
only a single row at any given time, and are used for adding, editing,
or viewing the information for a given entity.

The following table details the form types exposed by the derivation
engine:

[cols=",,",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Form Type |Cardinality |Produces a User-Interface for
|Browse |Plural |Navigation, Searching and Management

|List |Plural |Navigation and Searching

|Add |Singular |Adding a new row

|Edit |Singular |Editing an existing row

|Delete |Singular |Viewing an existing row as a delete confirmation

|View |Singular |Viewing an existing row (read only)

|Preview |Singular |Previewing a corresponding row as an embedded group
within another user interface
|=======================================================================

Note that user interfaces do not necessarily correspond one-to-one with
form definitions. User-interfaces can be embedded within controls in
other forms, allowing user interface definitions to be used as building
blocks for assembling complex forms with multiple entities exposed. For
example, the Customer edit may have a page control containing browses
for ContactEmail and ContactPhone.

In the sections that follow, the various components of the structural
definition of the result set of a query are considered, and how that
information is used by the derivation process.

===== Columns

Each column in the result set will correspond with a single control in
the resulting user interface definition. By default the data type of the
column is used to determine the type of control to be used, and the
title of the control is the unqualified name of the column.

Barring other considerations such as derivation tags and grouping based
on reference participation, the order of the controls displayed in the
user interface is determined by the order in which the columns appear in
the result set.

Because the result is being presented within the data access layer,
defaults, constraints, and event handlers defined on the column or its
data type are exposed as behavior within the user interface. This is
accomplished using the proposable interfaces. Although these interfaces
are discussed in more detail later in this part, it is worth noting that
defaults, constraints, and event handlers defined at the column and data
type levels will be acted on immediately within the user interface.

For example, if a user attempts to enter an invalid value for a
particular column, the error message is displayed immediately, rather
than waiting for the entire row to be completed. This affords a more
intuitive user interface, and is one reason for declaring constraints as
locally as possible. In other words, even though a given column level
constraint could be expressed in terms of a row level constraint, doing
so would mean that validation of the column value would not take place
until the user attempted to post the entire row, rather than immediately
upon entering the invalid value.

===== Keys and Orders

Keys and orders of the result set, whether inferred by the compiler or
explicitly defined on table variables, will be exposed in the derived
user interface as possible orderings for the result set. By default, the
derivation process will select the clustering key to order the result
set in the user interface. While the notion of a clustering key is an
admittedly physical consideration, the reason for the selection is that
the clustering key is most likely to be supported by a physical index,
and therefore most likely to perform acceptably when presented in a
browsing interface.

The clustering key is determined by first searching the keys for the
Storage.IsClustered tag. If no key is marked with this storage tag, the
compiler selects the key with the fewest number of columns as the
clustering key. Note that this same clustering key determination is used
when determining a clustering key in the physical storage layer.

In order to allow the user to select a specified ordering for the result
set, the order must be specified as a possible ordering, either with a
key or an order, within the result set. This requirement allows the
developer to control what orderings and searches are allowed for a given
result set. In this way, developers can ensure that requests for
ordering correspond with actual indexes in the storage layer.

==== Elaboration

Elaboration is the process of extending a given query based on the
relationships between that query and the other table variables in the
database. Elaboration is accomplished by tracing references in the
database, using the cardinality of the reference to determine whether
the reference should be followed, and how it should be included in the
resulting elaborated query.

Elaboration is an optional step, as indicated by the Elaborate component
of the derivation seed. If elaboration is not used, not only will the
initial query be unaffected, but the relationships between the query and
the rest of the database will not be exposed on the resulting
user interface, neither in user interface controls, nor through menu and
tool bar items.

The relationship of the query with other objects in the database is
determined by examining the set of references in the result set. These
references may be inferred by the compiler, or explicitly defined on
table variables in the database. In either case, the cardinality of each
reference is used to determine how it should be exposed in the
user interface.

By far the most important input to the elaboration process is the
structural information inferred by the compiler about the result set.
For development purposes, this information can be retrieved in text form
using the link:O-System.Diagnostics.ShowPlan.html[ShowPlan] operator.

Reference information is used in two different ways by the derivation
process: first, to extend the expression to be used to provide the
result set for the user interface, and second, in building
user interface controls, menu items, and tool bars to allow the user to
navigate to related information in the database from the derived
user interface.

The fact that references must target keys gives rise to two different
cardinalities for references: one-to-one, and one-to-many. A one-to-one
reference not only targets a key, but originates in a key as well,
allowing only one row from the source table variable to reference any
given row of the target table variable. A one-to-many reference targets
a key, but does not originate in one, allowing multiple rows of the
source table variable to reference any given row of the target table
variable.

By considering both cardinalities of references from the perspective of
the source or target table variable, we have four distinct types of
references:

* Parent Reference
+
Parent
+
A parent reference is a one-to-one reference, viewed from the
perspective of the source table variable. From this perspective the
target table variable is the _parent_ of the source table variable. In
this type of reference, a corresponding row in the parent table variable
must exist.
* Extension Reference
+
Extension
+
An extension reference is a one-to-one reference, viewed from the
perspective of the target table variable. From this perspective the
source table variable represents _extension_ information. In this type
of reference, a corresponding row in the extension table variable may or
may not exist.
* Lookup Reference
+
Lookup
+
A lookup reference is a one-to-many reference, viewed from the
perspective of the source table variable. From this perspective, the
target table variable forms a _lookup_ table from which valid values for
the columns participating in the reference in the source table variable
may be selected. In this type of reference, a corresponding row in the
lookup table variable must exist.
* Detail Reference
+
Detail
+
A detail reference is a one-to-many reference, viewed from the
perspective of the target table variable. From this perspective, the
source table variable represents _detail_ information. In this type of
reference, a corresponding set of rows in the detail table variable may
or may not exist.

A detailed discussion of how each reference is considered during the
elaboration process is deferred until
<<FormAutomation.adoc#DDGTheAutomationofForms, The Automation of Forms>>.

== Data Access Layer

The Frontend Clients begin where the Dataphor Server ends, namely at the
Call-Level Interface (CLI), or the low-level set of APIs that expose the
services and functionality of the Dataphor Server. All commands and data
retrieval requests, whether they are ad-hoc queries from Dataphoria, or
application requests to retrieve or manipulate data, ultimately pass
through the CLI.

The Data Access Layer is built directly on top of the CLI, and groups
all the functionality required by the presentation layer into a set of
easy to use components called the Data Access Components (DAC). These
components are then used by the forms and controls within the
application to manage data retrieval and manipulation.

In addition to the traditional cursor-style access exposed by the
Dataphor CLI, the Dataphor Server exposes several services that are
targeted directly at enabling Automated Application Development. Three
of the most important of these are: Navigational Access, Proposable
Interfaces, and Application Transactions.

Navigational Access is concerned with enabling efficient, scalable
access to relational datasets of any size. Using this technology,
Dataphor applications can expose the data in any application in an
intuitive, searchable manner without the need for developer intervention
or complex "filter-down" style user interfaces.

Proposable Interfaces are provided to enable the application to
participate in the business-rules enforcement of the Dataphor Server. By
utilizing these services, a Dataphor application can efficiently and
transparently enforce data integrity while the user is entering data,
rather than waiting for the server to reject any invalid information.

Application Transactions enable the application to perform data
manipulation even in the presence of complex multi-table integrity
constraints without requiring data to be entered in a particular order,
or using pessimistic transactions. The resulting user interfaces
naturally manage concurrency issues and minimize resource contention.

Each of these services will be discussed in detail in
link:DDGTheSpaceBetweentheData.html[The Space Between the Data].

== Forms

The Forms which make use of the Data Access Layer are defined in terms
of component hierarchies that describe not only the layout and visual
controls of the user interface, but the behavior of the form, and it's
connection to other parts of the application. These form definitions are
represented as Dataphor Form Documents (DFDs) and stored within the
various libraries that make up the application. Each Frontend Client is
responsible for retrieving the document definitions through the Data
Access Layer, and constructing an appropriate component hierarchy
representing that form.

In addition to static form definitions stored as documents, the Dataphor
platform allows form definitions to be dynamically manufactured using a
process called __derivation__. This process uses the operators exposed
by the Frontend Server to produce form definitions based entirely on the
application schema.

Whether produced statically or dynamically, form definitions can be
customized using the same visual designer that is used to create static
forms. Customizations to forms are produced using a process called
__visual inheritance__. These customizations are then saved as a
Customized Dataphor Form Document (DFDX) and become available in the
same way as other form definitions within the application.

Form definitions within the Dataphor framework are represented as XML
documents corresponding to the component hierarchy defining the form.
Each component corresponds with an element in the XML document, with the
attributes of the component corresponding to the various properties of
the component in the form. The XML schema used to describe these
documents is called Dataphor user-Interface Language (DIL).

=== Components and Controls

Forms are the fundamental unit of user interface in a Dataphor
application. Forms are made up of groups of user interface controls that
provide the mechanisms for the user to interact with the data in the
database, as well as the application itself. In this respect, forms in a
Dataphor application are very similar to the forms in a classic
RAD-style application. In the RAD paradigm, forms are collections of
software components that are each responsible for a particular common
behavior. Groups of these components are "glued" together using a visual
forms designer, and any form-specific application code is attached to
various events occurring within the components.

RAD development is productive precisely because of the amount of re-use
that is gained by relegating automatable application tasks to components
within the forms. The Dataphor platform makes use of this paradigm, but
separates the form definitions from the client applications, resulting
in client-independent form definitions. This abstraction allows the same
form definition to be used from a Microsoft Windows based machine, over
the Web, or any other platform that has a Dataphor Frontend Client.

This section introduces the underlying architecture and components of
the forms within a Dataphor application. This discussion focuses mainly
on describing the various controls and techniques that are available for
defining forms. Although complete applications can be built from scratch
using a traditional RAD approach, the vast majority of Dataphor forms
will be derived, rather than manually constructed. The process of
deriving forms, however, can be understood more clearly as the
automation of the RAD-style development techniques presented here.

==== Components

All Dataphor forms are described as a hierarchy of __components__. The
base component introduces the services necessary for each component to
participate within the structure of a form definition. Each component
may be either visual or non-visual. The visual components, also called
__controls__, actually have some visible representation within the form,
while non-visual components handle behind-the-scenes interaction such as
data access or command processing.

Each type of component is responsible for a different task within the
overall form. For example, a Source component is used to handle
communication with the Dataphor Server for a single query and its
corresponding result set. A TextBox control may then be attached to the
Source in order to expose a particular column within that result set. A
Grid control may be used to display a navigable view of the result set.

If the particular behavior required by the application is not
represented by some existing component, the Dataphor platform can be
easily extended with new components and controls to provide whatever
functionality is necessary. In addition, there are programmable
components such as the ScriptAction and DataScriptAction that allow
custom behavior to be written directly into the application.

Each component has an __owner__, which is the owner of the component
within the hierarchy. Owners are responsible for the cleanup of
components that they own. This ownership hierarchy is also used to
broadcast component events within the form. Each visual element, or
control, in the form also has a _parent_ property that determines the
visual containership of the control within the form.

Forms are actually hosts for user interfaces, in that a given
user interface may appear hosted within a particular form, or within a
frame within a control of another form. When a user interface is
embedded within another, the containership hierarchy can be followed to
its root from any component within the embedded user interface to access
the parent form.

Note that although the components themselves are instances of classes,
their behavior is modeled exclusively in terms of interfaces (in the
formal .NET sense of the word). For example, the basic behavior for all
components is described by the .NET interface INode. The base class that
implements this interface is called a Node. The reason for the exclusive
use of interfaces is so that different implementations of a given
component can be provided without affecting code written against the
interfaces. This allows each Frontend client to provide different
implementations of the same behavior. For this reason, whenever
components are accessed within scripts, the interfaces should be used
exclusively, guaranteeing that a given script will execute regardless of
the actual Frontend client in which it runs.

==== Actions

Actions are specific types of components that perform some operation
within the form. Actions are an abstraction that is used to model the
commands that are available within any given user interface. These
commands can be triggered from various sources such as buttons, menu
items, pop-ups, and so on. In addition, actions can be attached to
various events that occur on other components within the form, or
executed directly using scripting.

==== Controls

Controls are the base component type for all visual controls within a
Dataphor form. These controls are grouped into container controls such
as rows, columns, and groups, to provide layout functionality within the
form. Note that the layout in a Dataphor form is relative, rather than
absolute. In other words, all layout is handled by containership, rather
than position in a form-based coordinate system. This layout mechanism
allows for a much greater degree of flexibility in interpreting form
definitions in the consuming client, enabling much better cross-client
support.

==== Data Access

Data access within the presentation layer is provided by Source
components. Each source is implicitly connected to the Dataphor Server
using the Frontend session for the application. The source and session
together completely expose the functionality of the Dataphor Server
within Dataphor applications. The various data-aware controls of the
form connect to Source components to display and manipulate the data in
the database.

==== Scripting

In addition to providing behavior based on existing form components, the
Dataphor platform supports application-specific behavior using both
client-side and server-side scripting.

Client-side scripting is accomplished using the ScriptAction component,
using either C# or VB. The script action specifies a block of
client-side code to be executed. This block of code has access to all
the components within the form by name, as well as several implicit
variables allowing direct access to the host form and interfaces.

Server-side scripting is accomplished using the DataScriptAction
component. This component allows a D4 script to be executed on the
Dataphor Server. In addition, the D4 script can be parameterized using
DataArgument components connected to sources in the form.

=== Form Behavior

All forms within a Dataphor application share common characteristics and
behaviors, including the _state_ of the form, and whether the form is
__modal__.

When a form is waiting for user input, it is in _accept-reject_ state.
This state is indicated by the Accept and Reject buttons available on
the toolbar. When not in this state, these buttons are replaced by a
standard Close button.

In addition to form state, a Dataphor Form may be __modal__, indicating
the form from which the user interface was launched is not accessible
until the child user interface is closed. This is called _child modal_
because only the launching form is inaccessible. Other forms in the
application can still be reached, allowing multiple "threads" of
execution within the same application.

All this behavior can be controlled explicitly using the various
properties of a ShowFormAction. In addition, this action allows data in
the child form to be filtered by the calling form, using either the
Filter property, or by setting up a master/detail relationship using the
Detail link type.

=== Document Expressions

In addition to static document definitions, documents can be constructed
dynamically using operators available in the D4 language. Whenever a
document reference is required within a form definition in the Frontend,
a _document expression_ is used to specify the document reference. This
can be as simple as the invocation of a Frontend.Load operator that
simply loads the definition of a static form document directly from a
library, or it can be as complex as the actual form document embedded in
the expression. For example, the following program listing is a valid
document expression:

....
"<interface/>"
....

Typically, a document expression is one of the following:

* Frontend.Form(<library name>, <document name>)
+
This operator allows both static and customized form documents to be
loaded. If the document specified is a customized form document, the
customization will be expanded and applied, and the final, customized
form document will be returned, ready for deserialization in the
Frontend.
* Frontend.Image(<library name>, <document name>)
+
This operator allows documents containing graphic data such as images
and icons to be loaded using streams.
* Frontend.Derive(<expression>, <pagetype>, <master key names>, <detail
key names>, <elaborate>)
+
This operator invokes the Frontend Server process of user interface
derivation based on the given expression. For more information on the
usage and functioning of this operator, refer to
<<FormAutomation.adoc#DDGTheAutomationofForms, The Automation of Forms>> later in this
part.

For a more complete listing of the available document manipulation
operators, refer to the Frontend Library reference.

=== Visual Inheritance

Visual inheritance allows new forms to be constructed by starting with
an existing form definition, and then customizing the definition either
by changing existing properties, or adding new components, or both. The
customized form definition is saved only in terms of the differences
from the base form.

For example, the following document listing shows a simple Dataphor form
definition:

....
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-16"?>
<interface xmlns:bop="www.alphora.com/schemas/bop">
    <column bop:name="Column">
        <statictext text="Hello World!" bop:name="StaticText" />
    </column>
</interface>
....

And this document listing shows a customization to that form definition:

....
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-16" standalone="yes"?>
<dilx xmlns="http://www.alphora.com/schemas/dilx">
    <ancestor document=".Frontend.Form('General', 'HelloWorld')" />
 <document>
        <interface xmlns:bop="www.alphora.com/schemas/bop" xmlns:ibop="www.alphora.com/schemas/ibop">
            <column bop:name="Column">
                <statictext bop:name="StaticText" text="Custom Hello World!" />
            </column>
        </interface>
    </document>
</dilx>
....

Note that components that have been introduced in ancestor documents can
not be deleted in a customization. Only the properties of these
components may be changed. However, components can be moved to different
containers, and they can be made invisible using the Visible property.

Note also that visual inheritance allows multiple ancestors to be
specified. Each additional ancestor is applied as a customization to the
form definition, and then the final customization is applied. In this
way, behavior and visual representations from multiple ancestor forms
can be combined into a single form definition, allowing a much greater
degree of flexibility.

For example, the following two document listings show another static
document, and a modified customization that uses two separate ancestors.
The resulting form has both the StaticText from the initial Hello World
document, and the Trigger and ScriptAction from the second Hello World
document:

....
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-16"?>
<interface xmlns:bop="www.alphora.com/schemas/bop">
 <column bop:name="Column">
        <trigger action="ScriptAction" bop:name="Trigger" />
 </column>
    <scriptaction
        script="Trigger.Text = &quot;Dynamic Hello World&quot;;"
        text="Hello World!" bop:name="ScriptAction"
    />
</interface>
....

....
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-16" standalone="yes"?>
<dilx xmlns="http://www.alphora.com/schemas/dilx">
    <ancestor document=".Frontend.Form('General', 'HelloWorld')" />
    <ancestor document=".Frontend.Form('General', 'HelloWorldButton')" />
    <document>
        <interface xmlns:bop="www.alphora.com/schemas/bop" xmlns:ibop="www.alphora.com/schemas/ibop">
            <column bop:name="Column">
                <statictext bop:name="StaticText" text="Custom Hello World!" />
            </column>
        </interface>
    </document>
</dilx>
....
